Provably Safe Model Updates
Leo Elmecker-Plakolm⋆
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
le24@ic.ac.uk
Pierre Fasterling⋆
School of Computer and Comm. Sciences (IC)
´Ecole Polytechnique F ´ed´erale de Lausanne
Lausanne, Switzerland
pierre.fasterling@epfl.ch
Philip Sosnin⋆
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
p.sosnin23@imperial.ac.uk
Calvin Tsay
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
c.tsay@imperial.ac.uk
Matthew Wicker
Department of Computing
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
m.wicker@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract—Safety-critical environments are inherently dynamic.
Distribution shifts, emerging vulnerabilities, and evolving re-
quirements demand continuous updates to machine learning
models. Yet even benign parameter updates can have unintended
consequences, such as catastrophic forgetting in classical models
or alignment drift in foundation models. Existing heuristic
approaches (e.g., regularization, parameter isolation) can mitigate
these effects but cannot certify that updated models continue
to satisfy required performance specifications. We address this
problem by introducing a framework for provably safe model
updates. Our approach first formalizes the problem as computing
the largest locally invariant domain (LID): a connected region
in parameter space where all points are certified to satisfy a
given specification. While exact maximal LID computation is
intractable, we show that relaxing the problem to parameter-
ized abstract domains (orthotopes, zonotopes) yields a tractable
primal-dual formulation. This enables efficient certification of
updates—independent of the data or algorithm used—by pro-
jecting them onto the safe domain. Our formulation further
allows computation of multiple approximately optimal LIDs,
incorporation of regularization-inspired biases, and use of look-
ahead data buffers. Across continual learning and foundation
model fine-tuning benchmarks, our method matches or exceeds
heuristic baselines for avoiding forgetting while providing formal
safety guarantees.
Index Terms—verification, continual learning, fine-tuning,
safety
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning capabilities are evolving at unprecedented
speed, driving deployment in high-stakes domains where
safety and security are critical requirements [1], [2]. Mod-
els used in such critical domains (e.g., autonomous driving,
medical applications, and financial services) must continually
contend with input distribution shifts, newly discovered vul-
nerabilities, and evolving regulatory requirements. As a result,
regular updates are a prerequisite to safe deployment. How-
ever, even benign updates can trigger severe unintended effects
on model behavior—most notably catastrophic forgetting and
loss of alignment—which are extensively documented in both
foundation models [3]–[6] and in continual learning [7], [8].
In absence ofa prioriguarantees, model updates cannot be
Task 1
 Task 2
Sequential Learning w/o Safety Constraints (SGD)
Task 3
Task 1
 Task 2
Sequential Learning with Constraints (PGD + LID)
Task 3
Fig. 1. Illustration of our method on a simple ‘blobs’ dataset, where the
model sequentially learns pairs of classes. The true class label for each data
point corresponds to the color of the point and the background region to the
output of the model. Top: Standard training forgets previously learned classes.
Bottom: Training within our locally invariant domain successfully preserves
performance on earlier tasks.
deployed into safety critical contexts without complete re-
evaluation to satisfy regulators [9] or internal auditors [10],
[11]. Yet comprehensive re-validation is often impractical
due to prohibitive computational cost, latency constraints, or
inaccessible training data. This tension between the need for
adaptation and the demand for assurance is a central obstacle
to deploying learning systems safely in the real world.
Prior works usually seek to combat catastrophic forget-
ting or preserve model alignment during updates through
approaches such as regularization [12], [13], replay buffers
[14], [15], or parameter isolation [16], [17]. While these
methods display promising results, they do not come with
arXiv:2512.01899v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
formal guarantees of avoiding forgetting and therefore cannot
avoid the need for revalidation. To address this, we investigate
the problem of providing an update framework that hasa priori
guarantees that the updated model satisfies a given perfor-
mance specification e.g., prior task performance or predictive
stability. Beyond eliminating the revalidation bottleneck, we
discuss how such a framework may offer certifiable safety
evidence for regulators [9], reliable model version control,
enforceable terms-of-use for downstream users [18], [19], and
safe mechanisms for adapting to emerging vulnerabilities.
To provide safe update guarantees, we introduce the prob-
lem of computing a local invariant domain (LID): a connected
region of parameter space within which all parameters are
provably certified to satisfy a specified performance require-
ment measured on the prior task. Once a LID has been
computed, the safety of an arbitrary update can be efficiently
enforced by projecting any proposed parameter change onto
the certified LID, and where multiple tasks are observed in
sequence one can project onto the intersection of each task’s
LID to certify safety (discussed in detail in Section III).
The primary technical contribution of this paper is the
development of effective and practical LID computation tech-
niques as not all LIDs are practically useful. For example,
the LID containing only the initial model parameter vector
is trivially valid, but effectively prohibits model updates.
Thus, we formulate the general LID problem as finding the
maximalsuch domain (by volume) over all connected subsets
of the parameter space. Because optimizing over arbitrary
connected domains is intractable, we propose a tractable
yet conservative relaxation: an optimization problem over
parameterized abstract domains, which allows us to leverage
advances in bounding neural networks [20], [21] and abstract
interpretation [22], [23]. Of course, the optimization problem
over parameterized abstract domains must be constrained to
only domains for which we can certify that every parameter
respects the safety property. Thus, we instantiate a primal-
dual formulation of the constrained maximal LID problem
enabling the computation of approximately maximal LIDs via
alternating gradient-descent-ascent.
Practical implementation of this framework requires careful
solutions to several important problems to avoid unsound or
trivial LIDs. Firstly, where safety constraints are formulated as
properties of an input distribution, one must use a finite-sample
approximation of the constraint thus introducing a probability
of failure. To address this, we provide concentration bounds
that allow us to give worst-case probabilistic guarantees of
constraint satisfaction. Secondly, our primal-dual formulation
only finds locally optimal solutions to the LID problem. To
address this, we propose to use prior work from continual
learning to bias our optimization towards better solutions
and propose to compute multiple LIDs (LID multiplicity) to
avoid problematic local optima. Finally, many model updating
scenarios either maintain access to previous task data or have
prior information about what future updates might be relevant,
e.g., planned support for additional disease distributions in
medical applications or planned multi-lingual support for lan-
guage models. Taking inspiration from the continual learning
community, we support such scenarios by introducing a finite-
buffer extension to the LID problem.
In Section V, we experimentally demonstrate the effective-
ness of our approach across standard continual learning and
foundation model fine-tuning tasks. We benchmark the per-
formance of our algorithm against established regularization-
based approaches and benchmark the guarantees of our algo-
rithm against the continual learning approachInterContiNet
(ICN) [24]. An embedded step of the ICN algorithm can be
viewed as the computation of a LID, though the authors do
not pose the problem as such. Thus, ICN does not consider
finite sample error, use of replay buffers, LID multiplicity,
or principled constraint encoding which leads to potentially
trivial or unsound bounds and numerical instability. Across a
wide variety of synthetic and real-world benchmarks including
MNIST [25], CIFAR-10 [26], hate speech classification, and
multi-lingual adaptation, we find that our approach is able
to match or best benchmark performance while providing
state-of-the-art guarantees. In summary, this paper makes the
following contributions:
•We introduce themaximum local invariant domain (LID)
problem, and develop a general framework for computing
provable guarantees that model updates preserve behav-
ioral specifications such as alignment or task perfor-
mance.
•We demonstrate how LIDs can be used to certify consec-
utive tasks and can leverage replay buffers thus leading to
a more general approach for certified continual learning.
•We propose a relaxation of the maximum LID via abstract
interpretation techniques, enabling an efficient first-order
primal-dual algorithm to approximate maximal LIDs.
•We extend our LID computation algorithm using bias-
ing methods inspired by continual learning literature to
identifying empirically favorable LID solutions.
•We evaluate our approach across synthetic and real-
world benchmarks, including MNIST, CIFAR, and con-
tent moderation, demonstrating its ability to provide non-
trivial and practically useful safety guarantees for model
updates.
II. RELATEDWORKS
a) Model Updates Eroding Alignment 1:Ensuring align-
ment of foundation models is a growing area of research [27]–
[29]. Despite extensive training-time safeguards, it has been
shown that fine-tuning rapidly erodes many safeguards [4],
even when users are not malicious [3]. Some heuristics have
been developed to defend against this erosion [30]–[32], but
have been found unsuccessful in the face of more sophisticated
attackers [19], [33]. These studies indicate the start of an
arms race between attackers and defenders often observed in
adversarial settings, and they point to the importance of formal
verification in safety-critical contexts.
1We provide an extended discussion of related works in Appendix A.
b) Catastrophic Forgetting in Continual Learning:En-
suring that training updates do not degrade prior model ca-
pabilities (as seen in Figure 1), an issue termed catastrophic
forgetting [7], [12], [34], has been widely studied within the
continual learning community [8]. Avoiding forgetting is often
studied under the assumption that data from prior tasks are
unavailable [34]. In this case, heuristic forgetting defenses can
largely be split into approaches that use parameter isolation
(i.e., only updating a subset of parameters [16], [17], [35])
or regularization [7], [12], [13] (i.e., soft constraints limiting
changes to important parameters). With access to prior task
data for revalidation, replay methods have been developed
[14], [15]. Each of these methods has demonstrated some
considerable success in reducing forgetting; however, they do
not come with concrete, formal guarantees.
c) Formal Methods in Machine Learning:The field of
formal methods for machine learning algorithms has pro-
duced proofs of a wide range of notions including adversarial
robustness [20], [23], explainability [36], privacy [37], and
uncertainty [38]. Most related to this paper is the growing
literature on formal security guarantees for machine learning
models [23], [39] which, however, focus on specific dataset
threat models. The most closely related work isInterContiNet
(ICN) [24], which introduces a continual learning algorithm
that uses heuristic optimization to identify safe parameter
intervals. The algorithm begins with a large, potentially unsafe
parameter interval and iteratively contracts it via SGD to
meet an accuracy threshold. In contrast to our approach, ICN
seeks only to findsomevalid LID rather than amaximal
LID, reducing the model’s flexibility to learn new tasks while
preserving safety. Moreover, its shrinkage-based optimization
procedure is susceptible to interval collapse and numerical
instability, which hinders scalability to larger models. Finally,
the method does not incorporate multiplicity, biasing, replay
buffers, or finite-sample safety guarantees – key contributions
of this work.
III. CERTIFICATION FORPROVABLYSAFEUPDATES
Throughout the paper we will consider tasks to be su-
pervised learning problem with a fixed sample sizeN, i.e.,
D:={(x (i), y(i)}N
i=1, where we describex∈R n as our
feature vectors andy∈ Yto be our labels; we will assume
labels inhabit ac-dimensional space (i.e.,cclasses orc-
dimensional regression). We denote machine learning models
as parameterized functionsf θ :R n → Ywith parameters
θ∈R p. A proposed update to the parameters comprises
a vectoru∈R p, with the result of applying the update
being:θ ′ =θ+u. We denote a function that proposes
model updates (SGD, SFT, DPO, etc.) as an update mech-
anismM. Finally, we model behavioral properties of interest
such as alignment or performance criteria using a function
ϕ:R p×n×c →R. Without loss of generality, we use the
convention that lower scores ofϕare better and indicate better
performance/alignment, and in our experiments we takeϕto
be one minus the accuracy on a particular task, but this is
left purposefully generic with further discussion of concrete
choices in Appendix C. We now provide the general problem
statement for a provably safe update mechanism:
Definition 1.(δ-Safe Update Mechanism) Given a machine
learning modelf θ trained on a task with data distribution
P(X, Y)and a propertyϕwe say that a mechanismMtaking
in an arbitrary datasetD ′ and parameterθis a provablyδ-
safe update mechanism if:
∀D′,E P(X,Y)
h
ϕ
 
θ+M(θ,D ′), x, y
i
≤δ.(1)
Before proceeding to discuss how one might formulate a
non-trivial mechanism satisfying this definition, we highlight
several key implications of the definition. First, the definition
is independent of the updated model’s performance on the new
task (presumably represented byD ′), as this would be unreal-
istic given thatD ′ is unspecified and thus may be adversarially
chosen. Second, the fact that it is possible to chooseD ′ =∅
implies that the existence of anyδ-safe update mechanism
depends upon the initial parameter being satisfactory, i.e.,
EP(X,Y)

ϕ
 
θ, x, y

≤δ. Finally, given that this inequality
holds, we highlight that the trivially safe update mechanism
is the do-nothing mechanism, i.e.,∀D ′,M(θ,D ′) =0which
satisfies the definition.
A. Local Invariant Domains (LIDs)
As a foundation for constructing provably sound update
mechanisms, we now introduce the notion of Local Invariant
Domains (LIDs).
Definition 2.(Locally Invariant Domain) Given a machine
learning modelf θ trained on a task with data distribution
P(X, Y), and a propertyϕ, we say that a connected domain
T⊆R p containingθis a provablyδ-invariant domain if:
∀θ′ ∈T,E P(X,Y)
h
ϕ
 
θ′, x, y
i
≤δ.
Any update mechanism restricted to outputs in a domain sat-
isfying Definition 2 is one that satisfies Definition 1; however,
it may be thatT={θ}which yields the trivial mechanism.
To learn non-trivial safe update mechanisms, where possible,
we propose a stronger, modified definition:
Definition 3.(Maximal Locally Invariant Domain) Given a
machine learning modelf θ trained on a task with data dis-
tributionP(X, Y)and a propertyϕ, we say that a connected
domainT⊆R p containingθis a maximally provablyδ-
invariant domain with respect to a specified size metric| · |S
(e.g., Hausdorff measure), if it is a solution to the following
optimization problem:
max
T
|T|S s.t.∀θ ′ ∈T,E P(X,Y)
h
ϕ
 
θ′, x, y
i
≤δ.(2)
B. Provably Safe Updates via LIDs
In this section, we connect the notions of safe update
mechanisms and LIDs, highlighting specific cases of how LIDs
can be used to augment popular model updating mechanisms.
1) One-Step Updates (Fine-Tuning):Given access to a
known LID, one can make any arbitrary update mecha-
nismMa provably safe mechanism by transforming it into
MT := Π T (M(θ,D ′))whereΠis the standard projection
operatorΠ T (θ) := arg min θ⋆∈ ¯T ||θ−θ ⋆||and ¯Tis the
closure ofTto ensure this is well-defined. We emphasize
that while the projection itself can be a nontrivial operation,
any approximate projector that results in a parameter that
belongs toTis satisfactory. While projection satisfies the
definition, we can go further by carefully choosing the best
T. To guide selection, we observe that for any loss function
Lthat one wishes to minimize for the new taskD ′, observe
thatmin θ∈T ⋆ L(θ,D ′)≤min θ∈T L(θ,D ′)ifT⊂T ⋆. Thus,
intuitively, computing the largest domainTyields the best
performance on subsequent downstream tasks. We highlight
that purely finding thelargestdomain may not be effective
on its own, as the set may only be large in directions that are
not helpful for improving downstream performance. Research
in sparse updates in parameter isolation [16] or efficient fine-
tuning [31] may represent powerful heuristics for identifying
important directions. Additionally with access to some small
portion of data from the desired downstream task, one can
estimate the important directions. We discuss both of these
approaches for improving LID computation in Section III-B4.
2) Multi-Step Updates (Continual Learning):In continual
learning, the model is updated multiple times [34], and each
update must ensure that all previous tasks respect a given
constraint. Definition 1 can be generalized tok-many, ordered
updates by defining thek th update safety as:∀D ′
k,∀i∈[k−1],
EP(Xi,Yi)
h
ϕ
 
θ+
k−1X
j=1
M(θ(j−1),D ′
j), x, y
i
≤δ,(3)
whereθ (j) is the result of the firstjupdates and the initial
θ′ =θ (0). Though the definition of safety has changed,
the fundamental solution with LIDs needs only a minor
modification to generalize to this case. For thei th (previous)
task, we compute a LIDT i, and we can then compute a
new LID that holds for all tasks asT ⋆ =∩ i
j=1Tj, the
intersection of all independently computed LIDs. We highlight
that this intersection does not need to be explicitly/analytically
computed as we only require projection onto the intersection
which can be done approximately.
3) Use of Replay Buffer:An important assumption we
make in the formulation of our optimization problem (Def-
inition 3) is that the LID is optimized over only one joint
distributionP(X, Y). This encodes the assumption that after
the model is trained on a task, the corresponding test data can
no longer be accessed. Many popular approaches to combating
forgetting relax this assumption by allowing a small amount
of replay data. Allowing access to data from prior tasks, we
can jointly optimize our LID as follows:
max
T
|T|S s.t.,
∀θ′ ∈T, i∈[k−1],E P(Xi,Yi),
h
ϕ
 
θ′, x, y
i
≤δ i
whereδ i is the performance requirement for thei th task.
Importantly, this avoids the intersection step described in the
previous section. Typically, replay methods try to make use of
as little data as possible, meaning that expectations must be
estimated with only a few samples, which can be done using
the tools outlined in Subsection III-B5.
4) LID Biasing:Despite formalizing themaximallocally
invariant domain problem in Definition 3, the maximization
is posed with respect to current task. Even if one computes
the exact maximal LID, the domain may not span directions
that are important for improving performance on subsequent
tasks. Identifying such important directions has been the focus
of many prior continual learning approaches. In particular, we
draw from weight pruning literature, which uses weight im-
portance measures to determine parameters that significantly
contribute to the performance of a given model [40], [41].
Below, we discuss how these importance methods, broken
down into weight pruning or regularization, can be used to
bias LID computation.
Weight pruning approaches define a discrete set of weights
that are determined to be important. Formally, letI(·)be
a function associated with a weight pruning method that
maps parameter indices to either 0 (if non-important) or 1 (if
important) as determined by the pruning method. We can then
restrict our prior optimization formulation to only be over only
the unimportant parameter subspace i.e.., leaving all important
weights fixed. Where we denote members of this subspace
withR p
I ⊆R p we can reformulate the optimization problem
as:
max
T∈Rp
I
|T|S s.t.max
θ′∈T
"
1
N
NX
i=1
ϕ(θ′, xi, yi)
#
≤δ
Intuitively, this modification only allows for updates to those
weights that are unimportant for the current task, making it
less likely that one violates the stated constraint (afters.t.
above). A critical parameter in weight pruning methods is the
proportion,α∈(0,1)of weights to be pruned – we explore
this hyper-parameter in detail in Section V.
Additionally, one might consider a softer approach to con-
straining the LID optimization where modification of impor-
tant weights is not explicitly restricted but discouraged. For
this one might use the regularization approaches discussed
in the continual learning literature. Formally, we can define
R(·)to be a function that assigns a cost (a negative value)
to domains that allow large updates to important parameters.
For example, where per-parameter importance is captured in
a vectorβ∈R p
+ and magnitude is measured the largest
change allowed byTper parameter,d T ∈R p
+, one could
defineR(T) =−β ⊤d. Such regularization approaches can be
directly used to regularize our optimization formulation:
max
T∈Rp
|T|S +R(T)s.t.max
θ′∈T
"
1
N
NX
i=1
ϕ(θ′, xi, yi)
#
≤δ
Lookahead buffers.As stated, the above methods rely
solely on current task data to bias the LID computation
towards good solutions. While this may be effective, it still
encodes assumptions that may not hold, e.g., that the important
weights for this task should not be important for the next task.
We can more directly bias the LID computation for good
solutions if given a small amount of data (approximately)
drawn from future task distributions. We refer to this method
aslookaheadbuffer.
The lookahead approach enables us to estimate the subspace
of parameters that is important to thenexttask. Given the data
in the buffer are representative of the future task, each of the
biasing approaches above (weight pruning and isolation) can
be leveraged, but rather than computing weight importance
on the current task and discouraging modification, one can
compute weight importance for the future task and reward
domains that enable large magnitude modifications to these
weights.
5) Finite-Sample Guarantees forδ-Safe Updates:Defini-
tion 1 involves a constraint with an intractable integral over the
distributionP(X, Y), which is typically taken to be unknown.
In practice, we approximate the expectation using a finite
evaluation set that is held out during training (or held out
within a data buffer):{(x (i), y(i))}N
i=1 ∼P(X, Y), with the
empirical estimate denoted as,
ˆϕN := 1
N
NX
i=1
ϕ
 
θ+M(θ,D ′), x(i), y(i)
.
Assuming finite variance of this estimator, Chebyshev’s in-
equality can be applied, giving:Pr
ˆϕN −E[ϕ]
 ≥ϵ

≤
σ2
Nϵ2 .For anyβ∈(0,1), solving forϵsuch that the right-
hand side equalsβ, gives that with probability at least1−β:
EP(X,Y) [ϕ(θ+M(θ,D ′), x, y)]≤ˆϕN +
s
σ2
Nβ .
Therefore, to certifyδ-safety with confidence(1−β), it
suffices that: ˆϕN ≤δ−
q
σ2
Nβ .If the risk metric is bounded
ϕ(·)∈[a, b], we can tighten this bound using Hoeffding’s
inequality to: ˆϕN ≤δ−
p
(b−a) 2 log(1/β)/(2N).
However, ifϕis an unbounded function (e.g., cross-entropy)
and the variance is unknown, strict certification becomes
challenging. In such cases, we can rely on the Central Limit
Theorem (CLT) to provide a probabilistic argument for safety,
approximating the error of an empirical estimate asz 1−β ˆσ√
N
wherez 1−β is thez-score at(1−β)andˆσis the sample
standard deviation. We note, however, while this is effective
in practice for large sample sizesN, it remains an asymptotic
approximation.
To ensure strict, provable finite-sample safety, we restrict
our formal guarantees to bounded specification functions
whereϕ(·)∈[a, b]. For nominally unbounded objectives,
we employ a clipped versionϕ clipped = max(L,min(ϕ, U))
whereUforms the upper bound andLthe lower bound. This
ensures the variance is strictly bounded, validating the use of
Chebyshev’s inequality and further tightening arguments using
Hoeffding’s inequality. In our experiments, we utilize accuracy
(bounded in[0,1]), ensuring these finite-sample guarantees
hold. While a theoretically valuable discussion, in practice
most specification functions are naturally bounded or can be
reasonably artificially bounded.
We emphasize that without such guarantees being formally
stated, LID computation may be unsound. For example, with-
out a finite-sample correction, a LID computed with safety
constraints from a single held out test point could encompass
a much larger parameter domain, but will ultimately merely
yield a trivial safety guarantee. Moreover, the requirement
for our concentration argument that sample points are i.i.d.
from the joint distributionP(X, Y)rules out any constraint
sampling heuristics.
IV. PRACTICALCOMPUTATIONS FORSAFEUPDATES
We now present our computational framework for estimat-
ing maximal LIDs. Directly solving the optimization problem
(2) over arbitrary connected domainsTis computationally
intractable. To obtain tractable approximations, we introduce
two relaxations. First, we restrictTto a parametric family of
abstract domains, denotedT(α), whereαencodes the domain
parameters (e.g., widths of orthotopes or linear constraints of
zonotopes). Second, we approximate the inner expectation by
an empirical average over a finite sample. These relaxations
yield the following bi-level optimization problem:
max
α
|T(α)|S s.t.max
θ′∈T(α)
"
1
N
NX
i=1
ϕ(θ′, xi, yi)
#
≤δ.(4)
In the subsequent sections, we outline the propagation of
our chosen abstract domains and describe our primal-dual
algorithm for solving this formulation.
A. Propagation of Abstract Domains
The inner maximization in (4) corresponds to aparameter-
space verification problem, which seeks to upper bound the
empirical loss over a set of model parameter values. This for-
mulation is analogous to recent work on verifying robustness
to parameter-space perturbations [23], [36], but differs from
standard adversarial robustness settings that consider pertur-
bations over the input space. Specifically, we are concerned
with the worst-case model outputs over all parameter vectors
rather than input vectors. For ease of exposition, we discuss
the case whereTis theinterval domain, denotedT(α)with
α:= [α L, αU ], which encodes all parameter vectorsθ∈R p
satisfying
θ∈T(α)⇐⇒ ∀i∈ {1, . . . , p}, α L
i ≤θ i ≤α U
i .
This representation defines a box in parameter space and
serves as an abstract domain, formally known as the orthotope
domain, over which we can compute bounds on the output of
a neural network using Interval Bound Propagation (IBP) [20].
Given a neural networkf θ and an interval domainT(α),
IBP computes lower and upper bounds on the network output
at an input pointxfor anyθ∈T(α). This propagation relies
on all used activation functions being monotonic (e.g., ReLU,
tanh) [20]. This assumption should not be substantially restric-
tive in practice, as most commonly used activation functions
are monotonic. Moreover, there are some ways to relax this
requirement. Subsequently, these output bounds can then be
propagated through the specification functionϕto obtain a
sound upper bound on the empirical specification estimate. In
particular, we use the following IBP-based relaxation:
max
θ∈T(α)
1
n
nX
i=1
ϕ(θ, xi, yi)≤ 1
n
nX
i=1
ϕIBP (T(α), xi, yi),
whereϕ IBP(·)denotes the IBP-derived upper bound on
ϕ(θ, xi, yi)valid for allθ∈T(α). The IBP approximation
is bothsound(it provides a guaranteed upper bound) and
computationally efficient, requiring at most 4×the cost of
a standard forward pass [20]. Moreover, the IBP procedure
is differentiable with respect to the parameters[α L, αU ],
enabling gradient-based optimization of the outer problem.
B. Primal-Dual Optimization for Computing Maximal Locally
Invariant Domains
Interval domains offer not only a natural parameterization
for the constrained problem in (4), but also a differentiable
and sound over-approximation of the constraint. This yields a
single-level constrained optimization problem that constitutes
asound under-approximationof the original formulation. That
is, any solution identified via this relaxation defines a LID that
satisfies the safety specification, although it may be strictly
smaller than the solution of the original bi-level problem (4).
Although the relaxed problem still does not admit an ana-
lytic solution, it is amenable to Lagrangian-based optimization.
Specifically, to maximize the size of the abstract domain
subject to the IBP-based constraint, we formulate the following
Lagrangian:
L(α, λ) =|T(α)|S +λ
 
δ− 1
n
nX
i=1
ϕIBP (T(α), xi, yi)
!
,
whereλ≥0is the Lagrange multiplier for the (bounded)
safety specification constraint.
This gives rise to the saddle-point optimization
maxα minλ≥0 L(α, λ)which can be locally solved using
alternating gradient descent-ascent[42], which performs the
updates:
λt+1 = [λt +η d∇λL(αt, λt)]+ ,(5)
αt+1 =α t −η p∇αL(αt, λt+1),(6)
whereη d andη p are step sizes for the dual and primal
updates, respectively, and[·] + denotes projection onto the
non-negative orthant to ensureλ≥0 2. We additionally
apply an extra projection step toαthat enforces that the
nominal parametersθremain insideT(α). The above primal-
dual optimization procedure is designed to maintain feasibility
with respect to the safety specification constraint through-
out training. However, due to the inherent stochasticity of
2We employ thecooperlibrary for Lagrangian-based optimization [43].
gradient-based optimization, the final iterate may not strictly
satisfy the original constraint. To formally verify that the
returned LID, denotedT(α), satisfies the desired specifica-
tion, we compute a post-optimization certificate by computing
maxθ′∈T(α)
1
n
Pn
i=1 ϕ(θ′, xi, yi).
C. Choice of Specification Function
Effectively applyingalternating gradient descent-ascental-
gorithms and solving Equation 4 imposes specific require-
ments on the specification functionϕ. Most notably, any
specification function must be differentiable. While a con-
venient choice forϕis accuracy, due to its interpretability,
we cannot directly use accuracy since it is non-differentiable.
Thus, our experiments rely on using soft accuracyϕ soft as a
differentiable surrogate:
ϕsoft(θ) = 1
N
NX
k=0
CX
c=1
yk,cSoftmax(fθ(xk))c
wherey k is taken to be the one-hot encoding vector of the
correct class label.
Although soft accuracy, or any differentiable surrogate,
serves as the specification function during maximal LID
computation, the final certificate of the LID must be based
on the true specification function (e.g., minimum accuracy
over the LID). This distinction preserves the correctness of
our approach. For further discussion we refer to Appendix C.
D. Early stopping and Checkpointing
One specific improvement we propose—alongside less no-
table, further adaptations found in Appendix B—is early
stopping and check-pointing based on findings in Figure 2.
Figure 2 shows an example LID computation using our primal-
dual optimization. We observe that the primal objective (the
LID size metric) does not converge within 1000 iterations.
On the other hand, by inspecting the LIDs at each step
of optimization, we observe that the LIDs with the best
downstream performance on Task 2 occur early on in the LID
optimization. This suggests that the LID computation tends to
prioritize weights that do not contribute significantly to the
model’s output while keeping decisive weights for the next
task frozen (i.e., assigning them a very small interval).
To mitigate this effect our implementation saves the current
LID periodically during the computation and terminates the
LID optimization before convergence. This produces a setO
of domain parameters each corresponding to a LID. We then
issue a certificate of the minimum accuracy for each LID in
O. When training the next task, we must project the model
parameters (the result of proposed updates)θonto the set of
LIDsO. Several strategies could be used to choose the LIDo ∗
on which we projectθ. An intuitive extension of the general
case above is projecting onto the closest LID using:
o∗ = arg min
o∈O
∥Π(θ, o)−θ∥2
2
whereΠis the projection operator defined as:
Π(θ, o)i = Clamp(θi, θL
i , θU
i ), o= [θ L, θU ]
0 500 1000
Iterations
0
2000
4000
Objective Value
Primal Objective
(LID Size)
0 500 1000
Iterations
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Dual Objective
(Constraint Satisfaction)
Target Specification
0 500 1000
Iterations
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Task 2 Accuracy
LID Utility
(Task 2 Performance)
Best LID
Fig. 2. Analysis of primal-dual optimization for LID computation. We observe that although the primal-dual optimization continues to find larger LIDs
according to the primal objective, the LIDs with the best utility occur early on in optimization.
0
1
Accuracy
(Zero Buffer)
Class IL     
1 2 3 4 5
        Train Task
0
1
Accuracy
(With Buffer)
Final
Domain IL    
1 2 3 4 5
        Train Task
Final
Task IL      
1 2 3 4 5
        Train Task
Final
SGD EWC LwF ICN PGD w/ LID
A-GEM ZERO buf. SMALL buf. MEDIUM buf. LARGE buf.
Fig. 3. Performance on the Split-MNIST dataset under three continual learning scenarios. The top panel shows the performance of our method with zero
buffer, while the bottom panel shows the performance with various buffer sizes. The dashed line and hashed bars display the certificates on performance.
Error bars illustrate the 80% confidence interval over 100 runs for the zero buffer and 15 runs for the buffer case.
Another strategy is to choose the LIDo ∗ that results in
the best immediate performance on our current batch. Letting
B:={(x (i), y(i)}B
i=1 be a batch of data the loss :
o∗ = arg min
o∈O
L(Π(θ, o),B)
whereL(θ,B)denotes the loss over the batch atθ.
a) Downstream Advantages of Checkpointing:The intro-
duction of checkpointing forced an adaptation in our overall
algorithm to allow for multiple LIDs for a single model.
This can be combined with aforementioned biasing methods
to compute distinctly biased LIDs that can be adapted to
different types of downstream tasks. Having LIDs that are
expanded along separate dimensions of the parameter space,
lends a significant amount of flexibility to our algorithm that
predecessors like InterContiNet did not exploit [24].
While we do not further explore the practical impact of
obtaining differently biased LIDs for a single model, we
consider this a considerable advantage of isolating the LID
problem. LID multiplicity may be a fruitful area of study for
future works.
E. Algorithm Discussion
a) Strengths:A major strength of our proposed frame-
work is its compatibility with a wide range of prior research
advances. In particular, we can leverage a large number of
existing approaches in forgetting-safe continual learning and
in alignment-preserving fine-tuning. Moreover, given that our
method is independent of how one arrives atθfor their initial
task, our method can be used, in principle with any machine
learning model. This means we can accommodate arbitrarily
large foundation models. Additionally, because maintaining
our guarantees only requires the introduction of a projection
operator, we can apply our approach to any proposed updating
scheme. This is particularly advantageous given the rapid rate
at which model updating algorithms advance, e.g., RLHF al-
gorithms such as DPO, PPO, and GRPO. Finally, our approach
relying on abstract interpretation is computationally efficient
0
1
Accuracy
(Zero Buffer)
Class IL     
1 2 3 4 5
        Train Task
0
1
Accuracy
(With Buffer)
Final
Domain IL    
1 2 3 4 5
        Train Task
Final
Task IL      
1 2 3 4 5
        Train Task
Final
SGD EWC LwF ICN PGD w/ LID
A-GEM ZERO buf. SMALL buf. MEDIUM buf. LARGE buf.
Fig. 4. Performance on the Split-CIFAR10 [26] dataset under three continual learning scenarios. The top panel shows the average accuracy over all seen
tasks without replay data, while the bottom panel the average performance over seen tasks, while having varying amounts of buffer data available. The dashed
line and hashed bars display the certificates returned by our method. Error bars illustrate the 80% confidence interval over 15 runs.
and is able to certify a LID, expressed as an interval domain,
in4×the cost of a simple forward pass.
b) Limitations:Despite its computational efficiency and
differentiability, the IBP approximation we leverage is known
to exhibit increasing looseness with network depth and
width [23], [44]. Thus, while arbitrarily large networks can
be considered, parameter intervals over the early layers of the
network contribute disproportionately to the overall interval
bounds on the outputs [45]. As a result, our LIDs likely exhibit
larger intervals for the later layers of the network compared
to the earlier layers. In sufficiently deep networks, this effect
can lead to the early layers becoming effectively ‘frozen,’ with
little (or no) flexibility for future adaptation, while the final
layers, subject to less over-approximation, remain relatively
less constrained. This difficulty means that ensuring useful
guarantees for large models requires careful design and hyper-
parameter choices; we provide further systematic discussion of
this phenomenon in Appendix C.
c) Potential Future Applications:In this section we
discuss some of the potential future applications enabled by
a framework that enablesa priorisafe update guarantees.
Most directly, the requirement for ana priorisafe update
mechanism has been put forth as a regulatory requirement for
adjusting models in some critical domains. For instance, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) outlined guidelines
that enable pre-planned model updates, but only if they can be
demonstrated to be safea priori[9]. Furthermore, regulatory
attention has also been attracted by the wide-spread use of
foundation models (e.g. large language models). Regulations
surrounding foundation models may require persistent safety
mechanisms, especially given that models must respond dy-
namically to emerging vulnerabilities. While a valid response
would be model de-provisioning (taking the model offline),
using known-safe model updates is preferable for availability-
critical systems. In the context of updating provided or open-
source large language models, a potential use case of our
method could be guaranteeing the preservation of learned
behavior (e.g. alignment) for down-stream fine-tuners. As we
have discussed, if not done carefully, fine-tuning can rapidly
erode alignment properties [18], [19]. Thus, allowing third-
party users to safely tune a model while the publishing
entity can ensure,a priori, that this individualized updating
procedure does not yield a model that violates originally
aligned behavior. Such a guarantee may lead to robust terms-
of-use.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We empirically validate our approach on standard continual
learning benchmarks and provide further experimental details
and ablations in Appendix D. All experiments were performed
on compute infrastructure equipped with 2x NVIDIA L40
GPUs, using a custom Pytorch implementation. Our codebase
will be publicly released upon publication.
A. Continual Learning Experiments
BaselinesWe compare our method against the follow-
ing established continual learning methods: (1) EWC [7]:
a regularization approach that selectively weights important
parameters based on Fisher information, (2) LwF [12]: a
distillation-based method that preserves functional behavior by
using current task samples, (3) SGD: sequential training across
tasks without explicit mitigation of catastrophic forgetting and
(4) InterContiNet (ICN): a weight-space-constraint based ap-
proach to avoiding catastrophic forgetting [24]. To benchmark
our buffer extension, we observe our method compared to
its standard, zero-buffer implementation and Averaged GEM
(A-GEM) [46]. For each baseline we consider the main
incremental learning protocols outlined in [34]:
•Class-IL:The model learns to discriminate between an
expanding set of classes. Each context introduces a new
set of classes (e.g., first context contains ‘0’ and ‘1’,
second context contains ‘2’ and ‘3’, etc.), and the model
must classify across all previously encountered classes
without task identity information at test time.
•Domain-IL:The underlying task remains constant while
the input distribution shifts across contexts. The model
performs binary classification (odd vs. even digits in
Split-MNIST and animal vs. non-animal in Split-CIFAR),
but each context presents previously unseen input do-
mains. Task identity remains unavailable during infer-
ence.
•Task-IL:Learning to classify an expanding set of classes,
but only within the boundaries of each task context. Crit-
ically, task identity is provided during inference, allowing
the model to constrain its prediction space appropriately.
a) Evaluations:In Figures 3 and 4 we compare the
performance of our approach and baselines. In the top row
of each figure we plot the average accuracy/certificate on all
previously seen tasks (y-axis), as we observe the current task
(x-axis). In the bottom row, we show the performance of the
buffer-extension to our approach using a small (1000 samples),
medium (5000 samples), and large (15000 samples) buffer.
Additionally, we compare our method with A-GEM with a
large buffer and present results in a manner similar to the top
row plots.
b) Split-MNIST:We divide the standard MNIST dataset
[25] into five sequential contexts, each containing an odd
and an even number. Digit allocation across contexts was
randomized for each experimental run, with reported perfor-
mance metrics averaged across 100 independent runs. Figure 3
presents our method’s performance across the three Split-
MNIST scenarios. We train a feedforward neural network with
2 convolutional layers (each with 8 channels and a5×5
kernel), followed by a dense layer. In Task-IL, all contin-
ual learning approaches effectively acquire new tasks while
preserving performance on previous ones. However, for the
more challenging Class-IL and Domain-IL settings, average
accuracy deteriorates as task count increases. Impressively,
our approach demonstrates competitive performance in the
Class-IL setting, while simultaneously providing theoretical
guarantees (dashed line) that bound the minimum accuracy
under any future learning. In Domain-IL, our method main-
tains competitive average performance compared to baseline
approaches while exhibiting improved retention of first-task
performance. Moreover, our method observes more flexibility
in its constraints, whereas ICN is highly prone to constraint
collapse, as evident by the depicted tightness of the bounds.
Additionally, using buffer data can drastically increase the
performance of our method with a large buffer outperforming
even A-GEM in the most difficult continual learning setting,
CIL, and strictly improving performance in Domain-IL. Task-
IL does not show the same trend as the setting is too simple
and allows for enough model flexibility for even the zero buffer
case to extract consistently high performance.
c) Split-CIFAR:We now turn to the Split-CIFAR10
dataset and consider the training and subsequent fine-tuning of
a pre-trained ResNet18 model. The entire model is first trained
on the initial task, after which subsequent tasks are learned by
fine-tuning only the final linear layer of the network. The 10
classes are randomly allocated to 5 tasks, following the three
incremental learning settings described above. In Figure 4, we
observe similar overall trends to Split-MNIST; specifically, our
method is consistently competitive with baseline approaches,
while also offering formal guarantees on forgetting perfor-
mance. In Domain-IL, we observe consistently better accuracy
than baselines though our worst-case guarantees are below
the performance of baseline methods (which is generally to
be expected). Class incremental learning remains extremely
challenging for all methods–where we consider only preserv-
ing task 1 performance, our method significantly out-performs
baselines.
Following the findings on Split-MNIST, our method further
distinguishes itself from InterContiNet on Split-CIFAR10,
where ICN lacks significant adaptability to different task
settings due to its sensitivity to hyperparameters and numerical
instability.
B. Fine-Tuning Experiments
Previous experiments have primarily focused on multi-step
updates, we now further explore our method on single-step
updates via foundation model fine-tuning.
1) Foundation Model Performance on Hate-Speech Clas-
sification:We evaluate our approach on the binary task
of Hate-Speech Classification (non-hate, hate labels) for the
following datasets: Jigsaw [47], Twitter Hate Speech [48],
Civil Comments [49], Hatemoji [50], Sbic [51] and Hatecheck
[52]. For that purpose we use the frozen embeddings of the
following foundation models that at the time of writing have
top performance on existing benchmarks : 3-large (OpenAI)
[53], MXBAI (Mistral) [54], M2-BERT (Together) [55], GTE-
Large (Alibaba) [56], V oyage-3 (V oyage) [57].
For each foundation model, we proceed by first training a
linear layer in an unconstrained manner on the frozen embed-
dings of that model on the Jigsaw dataset. For each model, we
then certify approximately maximal LIDs for the linear layer
assuming a macro-accuracy (also known as balanced accuracy)
constraint on Jigsaw.
We then evaluate our approach by updating the Jigsaw-
trained model on each of the five downstream datasets. The
results are summarized in Figure 5, where each subplot
corresponds to a different target dataset and visualizes the
performance trade-offs induced by LID-constrained updates.
Along the x-axis, we show performance on the original task
(Jigsaw), while the y-axis reflects performance on the new
task. In particular, the x-axes show the initial performance on
Jigsaw (denoted with a star), the post-finetuning performance
with the LID (denoted with an open dot), and the formal lower-
bound from the LID on Jigsaw macro accuracy (denoted with
0.5 1.0
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Twitter
Hate Speech
0.5 1.0
Civil
Comments
0.5 1.0
Hatemoji
0.5 1.0
Sbic
0.5 1.0
Hatecheck
Task 1 Accuracy (Jigsaw)
Task 2 Accuracy
Pre-Finetuning Acc. Post-Finetuning Acc. Certificate Task 2 Baseline
3-large (OpenAI) MXBAI (Mistral) M2-BERT (Together) GTE-Large (Alibaba) Voyage-3 (Voyage AI)
Fig. 5. Performance of fine-tuning with LIDs in the Hate-Speech Classification setting, where certificates are given with respect to the first task. Each color
corresponds to a different LLM embedding model with the company of origin in parentheses. The gray dashed line denotes the average baseline performance
on the fine-tuned task when directly using the M2-BERT model..
0.5 1.00.65
0.70
0.80
0.85
Twitter
Hate Speech
0.5 1.0
Hatemoji
0.5 1.0
Hatecheck
Task 1 Accuracy (Jigsaw)
Task 2 Accuracy
Pre-Finetuning Acc.
Post-Finetuning Acc.
Certificate
Task 2 Baseline
Synaptic Intelligence - Lookahead
Fisher Information - Lookahead
Fisher Information
Synaptic Intelligence
Fig. 6. Performance of various biasing metrics applied to LLM head fine-
tuning for hate speech classification. All data points are based on 3-large
(OpenAI) as the underlying foundation model. The baseline corresponds to
certified fine-tuning without any biasing.
a bar). Performance on the new task is shown along the y-axis,
with the gray dashed line indicating the baseline performance
of M2-BERT with EWC. Across all model-dataset pairs, we
observe that LID-constrained updates may slightly degrade
downstream accuracy, though in some cases performance is on
par with or exceeding the unconstrained M2-BERT baseline
is observed. Simultaneously, our method certifies non-trivial
lower bounds on the original task’s macro accuracy, often
guaranteeing that substantial accuracy is retained even under
worst-case perturbations within the safe domain.
2) Foundation Model Performance on Multilingual Sen-
timent Analysis:Following the same procedure as above,
we additionally evaluate our approach on the multilingual
classification task of sentiment analysis (negative, neutral,
positive) for the following multilingual dataset : XLM-T [58]
which contains 8 splits corresponding to 8 different languages
We provide a subset of the results in Figure 7. The dotted
gray line represents the baseline performance of V oyage-3
using EWC [7]. When looking at the performances on Gemini,
V oyage-AI and 3-large, we observe that our method achieves
performances comparable to the EWC baseline and even
occasionally outperforms it. Additionally, our method certi-
fies non-trivial bounds on the original task macro-accuracy.
These results provide the first empirical evidence that formal
forgetting/alignment-preserving guarantees can be achieved
in real-world LLM-based NLP pipelines, without sacrificing
utility on the new task. The certified safety margins, though
conservative, are large enough to ensure that updates remain
practically useful.
C. LID Biasing Experiments
In this section we explore ablations on our proposed LID
biasing approaches by considering the Split-MNIST CIL set-
ting. We keep the convolutional architecture described in prior
experiments and consider a non-biased LID computation as
a baseline. We explore biasing the optimization using the
Fisher information matrix [59] and synaptic intelligence [60]
to obtain weight importance metrics by training our model on
a batch with either lookahead data or the original task data.
All experiments in this section consider pruning rather than
regularization.
In Table I, we show the performance on a downstream task
across different pruning percentages. We re-run our results
using 15 different random seeds and plot the standard deviation
as our error bar. For both weight selection using Fisher
information and synaptic intelligence, we observe significant
gains in the average case, but with large variance. On the other
hand, with a lookahead buffer, we observe that biasing can aid
in downstream performance across a relatively broad range of
Fig. 7. Performance of fine-tuning with LIDs on multilingual sentiment analysis task. We update a sentiment analysis classifier originally trained on english
language reviews on multilingual reviews. We observe non-trivial guarantees on all benchmarks (vertical line) while maintaining performance on task 1 (hollow
dot, x-axis) and besting baseline performance (dashed line, y-axis).
TABLE I
TASK2ACCURACY COMPARISON ACROSS DIFFERENT PRUNING PROPORTIONS WITH AND WITHOUT LOOKAHEAD BUFFERS. VALUES ARE REPORTED AS
MEAN±STDDEV. THE BASELINE PERFORMANCE FOR AN UNBIASEDLIDIS0.20.
Pruning Prop. 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.825 0.85 0.9 0.95
With Lookahead
Synaptic Intelligence0.37±0.22 0.53±0.29 0.67±0.19 0.73±0.18 0.65±0.19 0.39±0.22 0.07±0.14
Fisher Information0.35±0.18 0.45±0.31 0.64±0.26 0.73±0.15 0.67±0.12 0.38±0.25 0.05±0.12
Pruning Prop. 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.175 0.15 0.1 0.05
Standard (No Buffer)
Synaptic Intelligence0.14±0.11 0.37±0.20 0.28±0.18 0.28±0.17 0.38±0.18 0.38±0.26 0.39±0.24
Fisher Information0.14±0.10 0.35±0.21 0.31±0.21 0.31±0.22 0.36±0.23 0.39±0.21 0.39±0.25
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Task 2 Accuracy
0.200
0.729 0.731
0.389 0.394
Weight Pruning Performance
Baseline
Fisher Information
- Lookahead
Synaptic Intelligence
- Lookahead
Fisher Information
Synaptic Intelligence
Fig. 8. Performance of all of our biasing approaches for the best performing
pruning percentages based on Table I. Pruning percentages are 82.5% and 5%
for lookahead and no lookahead pruning, respectively. All methods are run
across 15 seeds, displaying the mean performance with error bars showing
the standard deviation.
pruning proportions. Performance seems to peak at 82.5% and
5% of frozen parameters for the lookahead and naive method,
respectively.
Figure 8 further highlights the significance of the perfor-
mance improvements for single-step continual learning sce-
narios (i.e. limited to two tasks) when using LID biasing. In
particular, lookahead biasing unlocks a significant amount of
performance by drastically simplifying the LID optimization
problem. However, even the smaller amount of pruning that
occurs in the non-lookahead optimization yields a simplifica-
tion that is often sufficient to extract additional performance.
We additionally explore these ablations for fine-tuning
LLMs. Figure 6 shows that lookahead biasing performs better
than or equal to an unbiased baseline in all of the explored
settings, whether it be hate speech detection or multilingual
sentiment analysis. Our observations from the MNIST setting
remain valid in LLM fine-tuning with LID biasing playing a
relatively minor role when lookahead buffer data is not used.
Interestingly, we find that synaptic intelligence with a looka-
head buffer allows noticeable improvements in both formal
guarantees and downstream performance. Further experimental
details can be found in Table V in the appendix.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce a novel framework for computing
provably safe model updates via maximal locally invariant
domains (LIDs), offering formal guarantees that behavioral
properties such as alignment and task performance are pre-
served. By leveraging abstract interpretation and a primal-
dual optimization strategy, our approach enables efficient
certification of model updates in both continual learning
and foundation model fine-tuning scenarios. Across diverse
empirical settings, we demonstrated that our method not only
provides formal safety guarantees for these updates, but also
matches or outperforms existing baselines in practice.
We then extend this approach by directing the optimization
of locally invariant domains using biasing inspired by classical
continual learning approaches. In particular, we find that bias-
ing drastically reduces the complexity of the LID computation,
yielding more effective parameter subspaces. We further show
that this not only holds theoretically but also experimentally.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Bommasani, D. A. Hudson, E. Adeli, R. Altman, S. Arora, S. von
Arx, M. S. Bernstein, J. Bohg, A. Bosselut, E. Brunskillet al.,
“On the opportunities and risks of foundation models,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
[2] L. Szpruch, A. Orfanoudaki, C. Maple, M. Wicker, Y . Bengio, K.-Y .
Lam, and M. Detyniecki, “Insuring ai: Incentivising safe and secure
deployment of ai workflows,”Available at SSRN 5505759, 2025.
[3] X. Qi, Y . Zeng, T. Xie, P.-Y . Chen, R. Jia, P. Mittal, and P. Henderson,
“Fine-tuning aligned language models compromises safety, even when
users do not intend to!”arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03693, 2023.
[4] X. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Petzold, W. Y . Wang, X. Zhao,
and D. Lin, “Shadow alignment: The ease of subverting safely-aligned
language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02949, 2023.
[5] Q. Zhan, R. Fang, R. Bindu, A. Gupta, T. Hashimoto, and D. Kang,
“Removing rlhf protections in gpt-4 via fine-tuning,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.05553, 2023.
[6] S. Lermen, C. Rogers-Smith, and J. Ladish, “Lora fine-tuning effi-
ciently undoes safety training in llama 2-chat 70b,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.20624, 2023.
[7] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins,
A. A. Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska
et al., “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,”Pro-
ceedings of the national academy of sciences, vol. 114, no. 13, pp.
3521–3526, 2017.
[8] L. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “A comprehensive survey of
continual learning: Theory, method and application,”IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2024.
[9] U.S. Food and Drug Administration and Health Canada and Medicines
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, “Predetermined change
control plans for machine learning-enabled medical devices: guiding
principles,” 2023.
[10] J. M ¨okander, J. Schuett, H. R. Kirk, and L. Floridi, “Auditing large
language models: a three-layered approach,”AI and Ethics, vol. 4, no. 4,
pp. 1085–1115, 2024.
[11] M. Wicker, L. Szpruch, and S. Mørk, “Move fast without breaking the
bank model risk management of genai workflows,” 2025.
[12] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,”IEEE transactions
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–
2947, 2017.
[13] Y . Shen, Y . Xiong, W. Xia, and S. Soatto, “Towards backward-
compatible representation learning,” inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp.
6368–6377.
[14] S.-A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “icarl:
Incremental classifier and representation learning,” inProceedings of the
IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp.
2001–2010.
[15] T. Huang, S. Hu, F. Ilhan, S. Tekin, and L. Liu, “Lisa: Lazy safety
alignment for large language models against harmful fine-tuning at-
tack,”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp.
104 521–104 555, 2024.
[16] A. A. Rusu, N. C. Rabinowitz, G. Desjardins, H. Soyer, J. Kirkpatrick,
K. Kavukcuoglu, R. Pascanu, and R. Hadsell, “Progressive neural
networks,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.
[17] H. Kang, R. J. L. Mina, S. R. H. Madjid, J. Yoon, M. Hasegawa-
Johnson, S. J. Hwang, and C. D. Yoo, “Forget-free continual learning
with winning subnetworks,” inInternational Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 10 734–10 750.
[18] M. Anderljung, J. Barnhart, A. Korinek, J. Leung, C. O’Keefe, J. Whit-
tlestone, S. Avin, M. Brundage, J. Bullock, D. Cass-Beggset al.,
“Frontier ai regulation: Managing emerging risks to public safety,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.03718, 2023.
[19] X. Qi, B. Wei, N. Carlini, Y . Huang, T. Xie, L. He, M. Jagielski, M. Nasr,
P. Mittal, and P. Henderson, “On evaluating the durability of safeguards
for open-weight llms,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07097, 2024.
[20] S. Gowal, K. Dvijotham, R. Stanforth, R. Bunel, C. Qin, J. Uesato,
R. Arandjelovic, T. Mann, and P. Kohli, “On the effectiveness of interval
bound propagation for training verifiably robust models,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.12715, 2018.
[21] C. Tsay, J. Kronqvist, A. Thebelt, and R. Misener, “Partition-based
formulations for mixed-integer optimization of trained relu neural net-
works,”Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 34, pp.
3068–3080, 2021.
[22] T. Gehr, M. Mirman, D. Drachsler-Cohen, P. Tsankov, S. Chaudhuri, and
M. Vechev, “Ai2: Safety and robustness certification of neural networks
with abstract interpretation,” in2018 IEEE symposium on security and
privacy (SP). IEEE, 2018, pp. 3–18.
[23] P. Sosnin, M. N. M ¨uller, M. Baader, C. Tsay, and M. Wicker, “Certified
robustness to data poisoning in gradient-based training,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.05670, 2024.
[24] M. Wołczyk, K. Piczak, B. W ´ojcik, L. Pustelnik, P. Morawiecki, J. Tabor,
T. Trzcinski, and P. Spurek, “Continual learning with guarantees via
weight interval constraints,” inInternational Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 23 897–23 911.
[25] Y . LeCun, L. Bottou, Y . Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition,”Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 86,
no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[26] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hintonet al., “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” 2009.
[27] T. Huang, S. Hu, F. Ilhan, S. F. Tekin, and L. Liu, “Harmful fine-
tuning attacks and defenses for large language models: A survey,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.18169, 2024.
[28] S. Zhao, M. Jia, Z. Guo, L. Gan, X. XU, X. Wu, J. Fu, F. Yichao, F. Pan,
and A. T. Luu, “A survey of recent backdoor attacks and defenses in
large language models,”Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
[29] X. Huang, W. Ruan, W. Huang, G. Jin, Y . Dong, C. Wu, S. Bensalem,
R. Mu, Y . Qi, X. Zhaoet al., “A survey of safety and trustworthiness of
large language models through the lens of verification and validation,”
Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 57, no. 7, p. 175, 2024.
[30] J. Mukhoti, Y . Gal, P. H. Torr, and P. K. Dokania, “Fine-tuning can
cripple your foundation model; preserving features may be the solution,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.13320, 2023.
[31] B. Wei, K. Huang, Y . Huang, T. Xie, X. Qi, M. Xia, P. Mittal, M. Wang,
and P. Henderson, “Assessing the brittleness of safety alignment via
pruning and low-rank modifications,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05162,
2024.
[32] D. Rosati, J. Wehner, K. Williams, L. Bartoszcze, R. Gonzales, S. Ma-
jumdar, H. Sajjad, F. Rudziczet al., “Representation noising: A defence
mechanism against harmful finetuning,”Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 12 636–12 676, 2024.
[33] J. Rando, J. Zhang, N. Carlini, and F. Tram `er, “Adversarial ml prob-
lems are getting harder to solve and to evaluate,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.02260, 2025.
[34] G. M. Van de Ven, T. Tuytelaars, and A. S. Tolias, “Three types of
incremental learning,”Nature Machine Intelligence, vol. 4, no. 12, pp.
1185–1197, 2022.
[35] J. Yoon, E. Yang, J. Lee, and S. J. Hwang, “Lifelong learning with
dynamically expandable networks,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01547,
2017.
[36] M. Wicker, J. Heo, L. Costabello, and A. Weller, “Robust explanation
constraints for neural networks,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08507, 2022.
[37] M. Wicker, P. Sosnin, I. Shilov, A. Janik, M. N. M ¨uller, Y .-A. de Mon-
tjoye, A. Weller, and C. Tsay, “Certification for differentially private
prediction in gradient-based training,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13433,
2024.
[38] J. Bitterwolf, A. Meinke, and M. Hein, “Certifiably adversarially robust
detection of out-of-distribution data,”Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 16 085–16 095, 2020.
[39] W. Wang, A. J. Levine, and S. Feizi, “Improved certified defenses against
data poisoning with (deterministic) finite aggregation,” inInternational
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022, pp. 22 769–22 783.
[40] A. Mallya and S. Lazebnik, “Packnet: Adding multiple tasks to a single
network by iterative pruning,” inProceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.
[41] S. Golkar, M. Kagan, and K. Cho, “Continual learning via neural
pruning,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.04476
[42] G. Zhang, Y . Wang, L. Lessard, and R. B. Grosse, “Near-optimal
local convergence of alternating gradient descent-ascent for minimax
optimization,” inInternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics. PMLR, 2022, pp. 7659–7679.
[43] J. Gallego-Posada, J. Ramirez, M. Hashemizadeh, and S. Lacoste-Julien,
“Cooper: A library for constrained optimization in deep learning,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.01212, 2025.
[44] G. Katz, C. Barrett, D. L. Dill, K. Julian, and M. J. Kochenderfer,
“Reluplex: An efficient smt solver for verifying deep neural networks,”
inComputer Aided Verification: 29th International Conference, CAV
2017, Heidelberg, Germany, July 24-28, 2017, Proceedings, Part I 30.
Springer, 2017, pp. 97–117.
[45] M. Wicker, L. Laurenti, A. Patane, and M. Kwiatkowska, “Probabilistic
safety for bayesian neural networks,” inConference on uncertainty in
artificial intelligence. PMLR, 2020, pp. 1198–1207.
[46] A. Chaudhry, M. Ranzato, M. Rohrbach, and M. Elhoseiny,
“Efficient lifelong learning with a-gem,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00420
[47] cjadams, J. Sorensen, J. Elliott, L. Dixon, M. McDonald, nithum, and
W. Cukierski, “Toxic comment classification challenge,” https://kaggle.c
om/competitions/jigsaw-toxic-comment-classification-challenge, 2017,
kaggle.
[48] T. Davidson, D. Warmsley, M. Macy, and I. Weber, “Automated hate
speech detection and the problem of offensive language,” inProceedings
of the international AAAI conference on web and social media, vol. 11,
no. 1, 2017, pp. 512–515.
[49] D. Borkan, L. Dixon, J. Sorensen, N. Thain, and L. Vasserman,
“Nuanced metrics for measuring unintended bias with real data for text
classification,”CoRR, vol. abs/1903.04561, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.04561
[50] H. R. Kirk, B. Vidgen, P. R ¨ottger, T. Thrush, and S. Hale, “Hatemoji:
A test suite and adversarially-generated dataset for benchmarking
and detecting emoji-based hate,”CoRR, vol. abs/2108.05921, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.05921
[51] M. Sap, S. Gabriel, L. Qin, D. Jurafsky, N. A. Smith, and Y . Choi,
“Social bias frames: Reasoning about social and power implications of
language,” inACL, 2020.
[52] P. R ¨ottger, B. Vidgen, D. Nguyen, Z. Waseem, H. Z. Margetts,
and J. B. Pierrehumbert, “Hatecheck: Functional tests for hate
speech detection models,”CoRR, vol. abs/2012.15606, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.15606
[53] OpenAI, “text-embedding-3-large,” https://platform.openai.com/docs
/guides/embeddings, 2024, accessed May 2025. An embedding model
from the GPT family.
[54] C. Choi, J. Kim, S. Lee, J. Kwon, S. Gu, Y . Kim, M. Cho,
and J.-y. Sohn, “Linq-embed-mistral technical report,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.03223, 2024.
[55] T. Computer, “m2-bert-80m-2k-retrieval,” https://huggingface.co/toget
hercomputer/m2-bert-80M-2k-retrieval, 2024, accessed May 2025.
Open-weight embedding model optimized for retrieval tasks.
[56] X. Ye, S. Iyer, A. Celikyilmaz, V . Stoyanov, G. Durrett, and R. Pasunuru,
“Complementary explanations for effective in-context learning,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.13892, 2022.
[57] V . AI, “V oyage-3 embedding model,” https://docs.voyageai.com/docs
/embeddings, 2024, accessed May 2025. Proprietary embedding model
optimized for search and classification.
[58] F. Barbieri, L. Espinosa Anke, and J. Camacho-Collados, “XLM-
T: Multilingual language models in Twitter for sentiment analysis
and beyond,” inProceedings of the Thirteenth Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference. Marseille, France: European Language
Resources Association, Jun. 2022, pp. 258–266. [Online]. Available:
https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.27
[59] A. Aich, “Elastic weight consolidation (ewc): Nuts and bolts,” 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04093
[60] F. Zenke, B. Poole, and S. Ganguli, “Continual learning through
synaptic intelligence,” inProceedings of the 34th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, D. Precup and Y . W. Teh, Eds., vol. 70.
PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017, pp. 3987–3995. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/zenke17a.html
[61] S. M. Rump, “Fast and parallel interval arithmetic,”BIT Numerical
Mathematics, vol. 39, pp. 534–554, 1999.
[62] M. Wicker, A. Patane, L. Laurenti, and M. Kwiatkowska, “Adversarial
robustness certification for bayesian neural networks,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.13614, 2023.
[63] M. Wicker, L. Laurenti, A. Patane, N. Paoletti, A. Abate, and
M. Kwiatkowska, “Certification of iterative predictions in bayesian
neural networks,” inUncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. PMLR, 2021,
pp. 1713–1723.
[64] H. Dang, M. R. Wicker, G. Botterweck, and A. Patane, “Certifiably
quantisation-robust training and inference of neural networks,” inThe
28th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
2025.
[65] P. Krukowski, A. Bielawska, K. Ksia ˙zek, P. Wawrzy ´nski, P. Batorski,
and P. Spurek, “Hint: Hypernetwork approach to training weight interval
regions in continual learning,”Information Sciences, p. 122261, 2025.
APPENDIX
A. Additional Related Works
In this section, we expand upon the related works provided
in the main text to discuss provable guarantees that are
related to this work. Firstly, we highlight that guarantees
we leverage, in the interval case, build on the algorithm
proposed in [61]. This algorithm found use in neural network
architectures with Bayesian neural networks [45], [62] and
has subsequently been used in explainability [36], control
[63], quantization robustness [64], and in the initial work on
continual learning [24]. In the initial work, [24], the authors
focus particularly on continual learning application and spend
considerable time discussing the problem of intersecting safe
regions and its complexity. In this paper, on the other hand,
we focus primarily on a principled approach to computing
a locally invariant domain. Thus, our problem formulation is
slightly different and our perspective on the problem leads us
to explore some practically important aspects not covered in
[24] including the use of buffer data and providing analysis
of finite-sample guarantees for our method. Within our main
text we reference the numerical instability of the approach
given by [24], a symptom of which can be observed in their
appendix where they use a learning rate hyperparameter that
ranges in magnitude from1e3to1e−20. This is due to the
fact that interval bound propagation can be very loose for even
moderate networks, thus as the problem scales to medium
networks (CNNs even), the approach of [24] will need to use
vanishingly small learning rates. Similar to ICN, the approach
provided in [65] attempts to improve the computation of LIDs
using hypernetworks. We do not compare with this method
as the proposal is not strictly sound due to the lack of hard
constraints when updating hypernetwork weights.
B. Interval Bound Propagation
This section details the interval bound propagation (IBP)
procedure we use to compute a sound over-approximation of
the specification function required for our LID computation.
For clarity, we focus on feed-forward networks with mono-
tonic activations, though the approach generalizes straightfor-
wardly to other architectures such as convolutional networks.
Feedforward Neural Networks.We consider a neural
network modelf θ :R n0 →R nK with parametersθ=
{(Wi, bi)}K
i=1 composed ofKlayers. Each layer performs the
following operations:
ˆzk =W kzk−1 +b k, z k =σ(ˆzk)(7)
wherez 0 :=x,f θ(x) := ˆzK, andσis the activation function,
which we assume to be monotonic (e.g., ReLU).
Interval Arithmetic.We now define interval representa-
tions for matrices, and their corresponding arithmetic opera-
tions. We represent each matrixAby its element-wise interval
bounds[A L, AU ], whereA L andA U denote the lower and
upper bounds respectively. The key operations required for
neural network forward passes are interval matrix addition and
multiplication.
Given interval matrices[A L, AU ]and[B L, BU ], we define:
leftmargin=*
•Interval Matrix Addition:[A L, AU ]⊕[B L, BU ] = [AL +
BL, AU +B U ]
•Interval Matrix Multiplication:Using center matrices
Aµ = (A U +A L)/2,B µ = (B U +B L)/2and radius
matricesA r = (A U −A L)/2,B r = (B U −B L)/2,
Rump’s algorithm gives[A L, AU ]⊗[B L, BU ] =
[CL, CU ]where
CL =A µBµ − |Aµ|Br −A r|Bµ| −ArBr
CU =A µBµ +|A µ|Br +A r|Bµ|+A rBr
These operations ensureA ′ ⊕B ′ ∈[C L, CU ]andA ′ ⊗B ′ ∈
[CL, CU ]for allA ′ ∈[A L, AU ],B ′ ∈[B L, BU ]. Both
operations incur modest computational costs compared with
their non-interval counterparts (2×for addition and 4×for
multiplication).
Bounding the Forward Pass.Using the interval operations
defined above, we can propagate bounds through the neural
network. For any inputxand parametersW k ∈[W L
k , WU
k ],
bk ∈[b L
k , bU
k ]fork= 1, . . . , K, we compute interval bounds:
[ˆzL
k ,ˆzU
k ] = [WL
k , WU
k ]⊗[z L
k−1, zU
k−1]⊕[b L
k , bU
k ]
[zL
k , zU
k ] = [σ(ˆzL
k ), σ(ˆzU
k )]
This procedure guarantees thatf θ(x)∈[ˆzL
K,ˆzU
K]for all valid
parameter combinations within their respective intervals.
For the monotonic activation functionσ, we can apply the
function element-wise to both the lower and upper bounds of
the input interval to obtain a valid output interval, preserv-
ing the soundness of the over-approximation throughout the
forward pass.
Bounding the Specification.The procedure for propagating
intervals through the specification function depends on the
exact choice of specification function. We assume we have the
interval bounds on the output logits of the network,[ˆz L
K,ˆzU
K],
computed using the procedure above. Letydenote the true
class index.
Standard performance metrics, such as model accuracy,
are monotonically increasing in the logit of the correct
class, and monotonically decreasing in the logits of all other
classes. Thus, the ‘worst-case’ output logits within the interval
[ˆzL
K,ˆzU
K]are given by
ˆzworst
K = ˆzL
K ·e y + ˆzU
K ·(1−e y),(8)
wheree y ∈R C is the one-hot vector corresponding to the true
classy.
Thus, propagating interval bounds through common per-
formance metrics corresponds to evaluating this worst-case
output:
•Cross-Entropy Loss:
ϕce(θ, x, y) =−log
 
softmax(fθ(x))y

≤ϕ IBP
ce =−log
 
softmax(ˆzworst
K )y

,
where the inequality reflects thatϕ IBP
acc is a certified upper
bound on the true loss for anyθin our interval domain.
•(Negative) Accuracy:
ϕacc(θ, x, y) =−I

arg max
i
{fθ(x)i}=y

≤ϕ IBP
acc =−I

arg max
i
{ˆzworst
K,i }=y

,
where the inequality reflects thatϕ IBP
acc represents a lower
bound on the accuracy.
•(Negative) Soft Accuracy:
ϕsoft acc (θ, x, y) =−softmax(fθ(x))y
≤ϕ IBP
soft acc =−softmax(ˆzworst
K )y,
which represents a certified lower bound on the soft
accuracy of the model. We include the soft accuracy as
a differentiable proxy of a hard accuracy specification in
the primal-dual computation of LIDs.
Since our definition of LID requiresϕto be bounded from
above, we define the specification for accuracy and soft
accuracy to be the negation of the nominal value.
C. Heuristics for Effective LID Computation
De-bias regularisationOne observation from our first
experiments in the CIL setting was that the model trained on
the first task is heavily biased towards the first classes (i.e.
the network will result in a very confident prediction of a
class from task 1 when confronted with data points from task
2). This means that there might be an important distance in
parameter space that needs to be travelled before the model can
start predicting other output classes, making future learning
challenging within our current local invariant domain. Thus,
we added a regularisation term that passes noise through the
model and penalises over-confidence on any particular output.
Here is a formal description of our method: LetFbe a noisy
distribution over the input spaceX ∈R n.Fcan be taken to
be gaussian, uniform or anything else. We show below which
distributions worked well in practice. We denote our machine
learning model as parameterized functionsf θ :R n → Ywith
parametersθ∈R p. In practice this function can be further
expressed as follow:
fθ(x) = arg max
i
hθ(x)
whereh θ :X →R C maps the input to their corresponding
logits inR C withCbeing the number of classes we consider.
The de-bias regularisation termU(θ)is expressed as follow :
U(θ) = 1
m
mX
k=0
∥s(hθ(Xk))−¯ s(hθ(Xk))∥2
X1, ..., Xm
i.i.d.
∼F
wheresis the softmax function and¯ sis the coordinate-
wise mean softmax function. This encourages the predicted
probabilities of each classes to stay close to each other for
noisy samples. During gradient descent the de-bias termU(θ)
is added to the overall loss multiplied by a regularisation factor
λ.
Choosing the right distributionFis decisive in ensuring that
the neural network stays unbiased when confronted with new
samples. Note thatFshould be sufficiently distinct from the
task distributionD t, otherwise learning tasktmay effectively
be compromised. In addition,Fshould stay general enough
to represent all potential inputs we might be confronted with
in the future. In our experiments we chooseFto be uniform
over the minimum and maximum value coordinate wise we
encounter in our datasetD:={(x (i), y(i)}N
i=1.
D. Experimental Details and Additional Ablation Studies
In this chapter we explore the experimental setups further.
All of the three main experiments follow similar testing and
evaluation pipelines:
Split MNIST.As mentioned in section V-A we use a two
layer CNN follow by a single fully connected classification
head. We first train this neural network on an initial task –
task details are depending on the specific continual learning
setup – then compute a LID for the given, trained model. Sub-
sequently, we use projected gradient descent to train the model
on each of the following tasks within the constraints provided
by the LID. In-between tasks, we continue to compute LIDs
for the most recently learned task, taking intersections between
the existing LID and the newly computed LID to produce
guarantees not only for the most recent task, but for all
previous tasks. This procedure results in algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1Certified Continual Learning with Locally In-
variant Domains
Input:f- NN model,θ ′ - initial parameter,E- # of epochs,
ϕ- specification function,α- learning rate,δ- minimum
accuracy.
Output:θ- Param. with acceptable error,t- number of tasks
completed
1:D 1 ={(x (i), y(i))}k
i=1 ∼P 1(X, Y)
2:θ 1 ←SGD(θ ′,D1, E, α)
3:[θ L
1 , θU
1 ]←LID(θ,D 1, ϕ, δ)
4:forj∈2, ..., tdo
5:D j ={(x (i), y(i))}k
i=1 ∼P j(X, Y)
6:θ j ←PGD(θ j−1,Dj, E, α,[θL
j−1, θU
j−1])
7:[θ L
j , θU
j ]←LID(θ,D j, ϕ, δ)
8:[θ L
j , θU
j ]←[θ L
j , θU
j ]∩[θ L
j−1, θU
j−1]
9:if[θ L
1 , θU
1 ] ==∅then
10:returnθ j
11:end if
12:end for
13:returnθ t
To split MNIST into separate tasks we randomly separate
the ten digits from MNIST into five tasks of two digits each,
while ensuring that each of the pairs is a combination of an
odd and an even number to make sure that the tasks are well
defined for domain IL.
Split CIFAR.For split CIFAR we also follow algorithm
1 with the only difference being the task creation. Here, we
hand pick well defined tasks to create the following splits:cat
TABLE II
EXPERIMENTALHYPERPARAMETERS FORSPLIT-MNISTANDSPLIT-CIFAR.
Category HyperparamSplit-MNIST Split-CIFAR
(TIL/DIL/CIL) (TIL/DIL/CIL)
LearningLearning Rate 0.001 0.02
Batch Size 64 128
Number of Epochs 5 5
ℓ2 Regularisation 0.01 0.01
De-bias Regularisation 0.01 0.01
Projection strategy sample largest closest best loss
LID OptimizationPrimal Learning Rate (η p) 0.33 0.33
Dual Learning Rate (η d) 0.01 0.01
Batch Size 400 400
Number of Iterations 200 200
LID Saving Period 20 2
BaselinesLwFλ0.001/0.05/0.05 0.1
EWCλ1e6 1e6
InterContiNetLearning Rate 0.01 0.01
Batch Size 1e6 128
Epochs 15/5/5 30
Radii lr 100/1000/1 1/1/0.1
TABLE III
EXPERIMENTALHYPERPARAMETERS FORLLM EXPERIMENTS
Category HyperparamDefault M2-BERT MXBAI
LearningLearning Rate 0.0005 0.0005 0.0005
Batch Size 64 64 64
Number of Epochs 1 1 1
ℓ2 Regularisation 0 0.01 0.01
De-bias Regularisation 0 0 0
Projection strategy best loss best loss best loss
LID OptimizationPrimal Learning Rate (η p) 0.1 0.03 0.03
Dual Learning Rate (η d) 0.1 0.001 0.001
Batch Size 1024 1024 1024
Number of Iterations 700 700 700
LID Saving Period 20 20 20
vstruck,frogvsship,horsevsautomobile, anddogvsair-
plane. To make the tasks compatible with domain incremental
learning, note that each of the tasks uses an animal and a
mode of transportation - two separate domains. Another slight
difference for CIFAR is that we used a ResNet18 model and
then train a MLP classifier on the embeddings obtained from
the ResNet. We restrict our LID computations and continual
learning to the MLP only as opposed to the entire model
pipeline as is the case for the MNIST setup.
E. Foundation Model Hyperparameters
We present the hyperparameters used in Table III.
F . Buffer-based Learning Scheme
The algorithm for the buffer-based case is reasonably similar
to the procedure described in algorithm 1. The main difference
is that instead of exiting after achieving the maximum accuracy
within a given LID, we check if the achieved performance
exceeds a certain target performance. If it does, we proceed
to the next task, if it doesn’t, we recompute the LID using
samples stored in a buffer. When updating, we drawk= 200
samples of each task from the buffer and use the combined
data to compute an updated LID. This updated LID, now
centered at the most recent set of model parameters,θ, ought
to allow for further increases in performance on the current
task, while still maintaining a safe-area with guarantees. This
results in algorithm 2.
The hyperparameters for the buffer algorithm are largely the
same as those shown in table II with the only addition being
the aforementionedk, the target accuracy, and the maximum
buffer calls per task shown in table IV
G. Empirical Computational Analysis
To discuss the introduced computational overhead of pro-
viding safe updates we train each method found in Table VI
on two separate tasks of Split MNIST with an interleaved safe
space computation for our method and ICN. Across 50 runs
we report the mean time taken and one standard deviation
of variance in seconds. It becomes apparent that our method
does introduce some overhead compared to methods that do
not compute safe spaces. While there is some additional delta
due to the projection step during projected gradient descent,
most of the overhead comes from the one-off step of the LID
computation.
TABLE IV
EXPERIMENTALHYPERPARAMETERS FORSPLIT-MNISTANDSPLIT-CIFARFOR OUR BUFFER-BASED ALGORITHM.
Category HyperparamSplit-MNIST Split-CIFAR
(TIL/DIL/CIL) (TIL/DIL/CIL)
LID OptimizationTarget Accuracy 0.65/0.65/0.65 0.65/0.75/0.55
Max Buffer Calls 1/3/7 1/3/7
BaselinesA-GEM memory size 3750 3750
TABLE V
EXPERIMENTAL HYPERPARAMETERS FOR WEIGHT PRUNING EXPERIMENTS. THIS ACTS AS AN EXTENSION TOLLMANDSPLIT-MNISTEXPERIMENTS,
HENCE THE BASELINE USES HYPERPARAMETERS SPECIFIED INTABLESIIANDIIIUNLESS MENTIONED OTHERWISE.
Category HyperparamSplit-MNIST LLM
LID OptimizationNumber of Iterations 300 300
LID Saving Period 100 100
Freezing Proportion - Lookahead 0.825 0.85
Freezing Proportion 0.05 0.05
TABLE VI
EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF COMPUTATIONAL COST OF DIFFERENT
CONTINUAL LEARNING METHODS IN SECONDS AND ONE STANDARD
DEVIATION.
Method Value [s]
Ours43.18±2.19
of which LID12.92±0.79
ICN70.09±2.88
of which LID51.81±2.13
SGD16.08±0.82
EWC15.17±1.49
A-GEM20.29±0.89
LwF14.96±0.80
Algorithm 2Certified Continual Learning with Locally In-
variant Domains and Buffers
Input:f- NN model,θ ′ - initial parameter,E- # of epochs,
ϕ- specification function,α- learning rate,δ- minimum
accuracy,target acc- target accuracy,M- buffer,b- buffer
size,acc- accuracy metric,max calls- maximum number
of buffer calls per task.
Output:θ- Param. with acceptable error,t- number of tasks
completed
1:D 1 ={(x (i), y(i))}k
i=1 ∼P 1(X, Y)
2:θ 1 ←SGD(θ ′,D1, E, α)
3:[θ L
1 , θU
1 ]←LID(θ,D 1, ϕ, δ)
4:D ∗
1 ={(x (i), y(i))}bi
i=1 ∼P 1(X, Y)
5:M 1 ←D 1
6:forj∈2, ..., tdo
7:D j ={(x (i), y(i))}k
i=1 ∼P j(X, Y)
8:θ j ←PGD(θ j−1,Dj, E, α,[θL
j−1, θU
j−1])
9:[θ L
j , θU
j ]←LID(θ,D j, ϕ, δ)
10:[θ L
j , θU
j ]←[θ L
j , θU
j ]∩[θ L
j−1, θU
j−1]
11:curr acc=acc(θ, Dj)
12:whilen < max calls&not empty(M i:j−1) &
target acc > curraccdo
13:D 1:j−1 ={(x (i), y(i))}k
i=1 ∼M 1:j−1
14:[θ L
j−1, θU
j−1]←LID(D 1:j−1, ϕ, δ)
15:θ j ←PGD(θ j,Dj, E, α,[θL
j−1, θU
j−1])
16:curr acc=acc(θ, Dj)
17:end while
18:D ∗
j ={(x (i), y(i))}bi
i=1 ∼P j(X, Y)
19:M j ←D ∗
j
20:if[θ L
1 , θU
1 ] ==∅then
21:returnθ j
22:end if
23:end for
24:returnθ t