preprint
Weight Space Representation Learning with
Neural Fields
Zhuoqian Yang, Mathieu Salzmann, Sabine S¨ usstrunk
EPFL
<first>.<last>@epfl.ch
Abstract
In this work, we investigate the potential of weights to serve as effective
representations, focusing on neural fields. Our key insight is that constrain-
ing the optimization space through a pre-trained base model and low-rank
adaptation (LoRA) can induce structure in weight space. Across recon-
struction, generation, and analysis tasks on 2D and 3D data, we find that
multiplicative LoRA weights achieve high representation quality while ex-
hibiting distinctiveness and semantic structure. When used with latent
diffusion models, multiplicative LoRA weights enable higher-quality gener-
ation than existing weight-space methods.
1 Introduction
Neural network weights have traditionally been viewed as opaque byproducts of optimiza-
tion, high-dimensional vectors that encode learned functions but resist interpretation or
manipulation. This perspective has begun to shift with recent advances in weight space
learning, where researchers have demonstrated that network parameters can be merged
Yang et al. (2024); Singh et al.; Lim et al. (2024b), generated Erko¸ c et al. (2023); Peebles
et al. (2023), or used as inputs to other networks Zhou et al. (2023b); Hospedales et al.
(2020); Lim et al. (2024a). A fundamental question nonetheless remains largely unexplored:
Can neural network weights themselves serve as meaningful representations for data?
We investigate this question in the context of implicit neural representations (INRs), where
neural networks are trained to overfit individual samples by mapping coordinates to values.
INRs have proven to be versatile, capable of encoding diverse data modalities within a unified
architecture Xie et al. (2022). Since INRs inherently encode signals as network parameters,
using these weights as representations is a natural next step. However, neural network
weights are known to be ambiguous by nature, for example because neuron permutations and
scaling leave the network function unchanged Zhao et al. (2025). As such, different random
initializations may yield vastly different parameter configurations yet functionally identical
models. In other words, functionally identical networks can be arbitrarily far in weight space
Zhao et al. (2025), challenging the use of network weights as data representations.
Our key insight is that constraining the network weights of different samples by introducing
appropriate inductive biases allows us to transform these chaotic parameters into organized,
semantic representations. To this end, as illustrated in Figure 1, we propose to use Low-
Rank Adaptation (LoRA) Hu et al. (2022) within a pre-trained base neural field to create
structured weight space representations. This design is motivated by two key properties of
LoRA: First, adaptation through LoRA constrains the weight updates to lie within a low-
dimensional subspace defined by the base model. Hu et al. Hu et al. (2022) demonstrate
this through subspace similarity analysis, showing that adaptations at different ranks share
common singular vector directions, suggesting the existence of a meaningful low-rank adap-
tation subspace. Second, the low-rank constraint inherently reduces the dimensionality of
the weight space representation, mitigating the curse of dimensionality that would otherwise
hinder learning in high-dimensional parameter spaces.
Notably, we find that the standard additive LoRA formulation is insufficient for weight space
learning in the context of neural fields. Instead, we introduce multiplicative LoRA (mLoRA),
1
arXiv:2512.01759v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
preprint
θ
p ∈ ℝn
vp ∈ ℝm
ϕ1
ϕ2
ϕi
ϕ3
input 
coordinate
signal 
values
multiplicative 
low-rank 
adaptation
base 
network
mLoRA 
weight
Weight Space Representation
Generation ClassificationReconstruction …
Figure 1: LoRA based weight space representation with neural fields. Given an input
coordinatep∈R n, a base neural field is adapted via multiplicative LoRA weightsϕ i to
produce signal valuesv p ∈R m, each weight representing an instance. The LoRA weights
themselves form structured representations in weight space, enabling diverse applications
including reconstruction, generation, and clustering.
where weight updates are applied through element-wise multiplication rather than addition.
This multiplicative formulation naturally aligns with modulation mechanisms in generative
neural fields Anokhin et al. (2021); Karras et al. (2021); Chan et al. (2020), where features
are composed through multiplicative interactions, enabling effective weight space learning.
We validate our approach across multiple data modalities and tasks. First, we establish that
LoRA-based weight representations achieve lower reconstruction error, greater robustness
to initialization, and better linear mode connectivity than vanilla INR weights. Second, we
demonstrate that these structured weight spaces support high-quality generative modeling,
with diffusion models trained on multiplicative LoRA weights outperforming prior attempts
in weight space neural field generation. Finally, through evaluation on discriminative tasks
(i.e.classification and clustering), we confirm that the weight space structure correlates
with semantic properties of the encoded data.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. We demonstrate that neural network weights, when properly constrained, can serve as
effective data representations that capture semantic structure.
2. We introduce multiplicative LoRA for neural fields, which we show provides superior
representation quality compared to standard additive LoRA and vanilla weight parameter-
izations.
3. We validate weight space representations across diverse tasks: Reconstruction, genera-
tion, and analysis, establishing their viability as a representation paradigm.
2 Related Work
2.1 Weight Space Learning
The treatment of neural network weights as learnable representations has emerged as a
distinct research direction, progressing from early hypernetwork approaches to sophisticated
weight-space generative models. Early work demonstrated that network parameters could
be generated by auxiliary networks Ha et al. (2016), though these methods suffered from
prohibitive memory overhead when scaling to modern architectures Wang & Others (2025).
The fundamental challenge of weight space manipulation stems from permutation symmetry:
Functionally identical networks can have vastly different parameter configurations due to
neuron reordering Gao & Others (2024); Navon et al. (2023).
2
preprint
Recent advances have addressed these challenges through multiple strategies. Model merging
techniques leverage optimal transport and activation matching to align neurons before pa-
rameter fusion Singh & Jaggi (2020); Ormaniec & Others (2025), while equivariant architec-
tures explicitly respect weight-space symmetries when processing network parameters Navon
et al. (2023); Kofinas et al. (2024). A parallel research direction focuses on building neural
networks that process weights as inputs. Neural Functional Transformers Zhou et al. (2023b)
and permutation-equivariant neural functionals Zhou et al. (2023a) construct architectures
that can extract information from network parameters while respecting their symmetries.
Methods operating on Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) weights Lim et al. (2024a) develop
GL-equivariant networks to process low-rank weight spaces of fine-tuned models.
Our work differs fundamentally from these weight-processing approaches: Rather than
building encoders or networks that consume weights as inputs, we investigate whether
optimization-derived weights candirectlyserve as representations without additional en-
coding steps. This distinction positions our contribution as exploring the intrinsic repre-
sentational quality of weight spaces rather than developing architectures for weight-space
processing.
Generative modeling in weight space has seen significant progress, with diffusion models now
capable of synthesizing functional neural networks. Weight-space generation with diffusion
models Wang et al. (2024); Wang & Others (2025); Peebles et al. (2023) has been explored
for generating models for image classification. With a different focus, our work explore
neural neural field weights as representation of data that support high-quality generation
and encode semantic structure.
2.2 Implicit Neural Representations
Implicit Neural Representations (INRs), also known as neural fields, are continuous functions
parameterized by neural networks that map coordinates to signal values. INRs represent
signals as continuous functions Φ :R n →R m, where a neural network mapsn-dimensional
coordinates tom-dimensional quantities. This paradigm enables resolution-independent,
memory-efficient representations of complex signals.
The versatility of INRs has been extensively documented Xie et al. (2022); Essakine et al.
(2024). These representations are fundamentally data-agnostic, employing identical network
architectures across diverse modalities including 1D audio, 2D images, 3D shapes, and even
4D spatiotemporal data.
Beyond single-instance fitting, generalizable INRs have been proposed to learn priors across
datasets through approaches based on autoencoders Park et al. (2019), generative adversarial
networks (GANs) Anokhin et al. (2021); Karras et al. (2021); Chan et al. (2020) and shared
layers Vyas et al. (2024). The GAN-based works could be seen as extensions of the StyleGAN
Karras et al. (2019) paradigm into the realm of neural fields. They generate different
instances by modulating an MLP trunk, upon which we build as base network.
Because INRs parameterize data as neural network functions, the weights offer a direct
pathway to data representation. This perspective has practical applications in compres-
sion, with methods Dupont et al. (2021); Gordon et al. (2024) demonstrating competitive
compression ratios by storing quantized network parameters instead of raw data. However,
whether the collection of weights could encode semantic structure remains an open ques-
tion. Another line of work employs hypernetworks Klocek et al. (2019) and transformers
Chen & Wang (2022) to predict INR weights from input data via learned mappings as way
of data generation. In contrast, we investigate whether gradient-descent-optimized weights
can directly serve as meaningful representations. HyperDiffusion Erko¸ c et al. (2023) train
a diffusion transformer to generate neural field weights as mean of synthesizing 3D shapes
and 4D animated shapes. Our work build on this work to further explore what ensures
successful weight space generative modeling as well as explore semantic structures in neural
field weights.
3
preprint
3 Method
We begin by establishing weight space representations via Low-Rank Adaptation of pre-
trained base neural fields (Section 3.1). We then introduce multiplicative LoRA, a key
modification that enables effective weight space learning for neural fields (Section 3.2). Next,
we describe the base model architecture and training procedure (Section 3.3), followed by
asymmetric masking to address permutation symmetry (Section 3.4). Finally, we present a
hierarchical diffusion transformer for generative modeling in weight space (Section 3.5).
3.1 Weight Space Representation
Given a dataset consisting of a collection of instances{x i}N
i=1, we optimize one neural field
for each instance. Each instance is then represented by the weights of its corresponding
network, forming a weight space representation.
The simplest way to represent an instance with network weights consists of using standalone
MLP weights. For each instancex i, we fit a small MLP from scratch. The instancex i is
then represented with the weights of the MLPθ i. Formally,
θi = min
θ
Lrecon [f(p|θ),x i(p)],(1)
wherepis a spatial coordinate. The architecture consists of a Fourier Feature layer followed
by two linear layers. We evaluate this approach as a baseline, to encourage consistency, all
MLPs share the same random initialization across different instances as is done in Erko¸ c
et al. (2023).
Encouraged by the observation that LoRA weights converge to a certain a subspace Hu et al.
(2022), which indicates that the base network enforce a certain structure on the space of
LoRA weights, we fine tune a pre-trained base model using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA).
For each instancex i, we optimize LoRA parametersϕ i ={A l
i,B l
i}L
l=1 acrossLlayers while
keeping the base weights frozen. That is, we solve
ϕi = min
ϕ
Lrecon [f(p|LoRA(W,ϕ)),x i(p)],(2)
whereWdenotes the frozen base model weights andL recon is a reconstruction loss. The
instancex i is then represented with the LoRA weightsϕ i, illustrated in Figure 1. Like is
done for Standalone MLP weights, all LoRA share the same initialization.
3.2 Multiplicative LoRA
We employ multiplicative LoRA rather than the standard additive formulation. Standard
LoRA Hu et al. (2022) adapts a pre-trained weight matrixW∈R dout×din through additive
low-rank updatesW ′ =W+BAwhereA∈R r×din andB∈R dout×r are low-rank matrices
with rankr≪min(d in, dout). We introduce a multiplicative formulation that applies weight
updates through elementwise multiplication as
W′ =W⊙BA,(3)
where⊙denotes elementwise multiplication. This formulation enables more effective mod-
ulation of features, analogous to successful modulation techniques in generative neural
fields Anokhin et al. (2021); Karras et al. (2021); Chan et al. (2020). In our experiments,
we demonstrate that this design is a critical to obtaining good weight space structure and
performance on reconstruction, generation and discriminative tasks.
3.3 Base Model Architecture and Training
For LoRA-based representations, we require a strong base model that captures transferable
features across the data distribution. We adopt a coordinate-based neural field architecture
with multiplicative weight modulation, a design found across multiple generative neural field
works Anokhin et al. (2021); Karras et al. (2021); Chan et al. (2020). The network consists of
an MLP-based trunk, where variations across instances are injected through multiplicative
4
preprint
Diffusion Transformer
…
Multi-Head Attention
…a(1)
1 b(1)
1
concat
a(r)
1 b(r)
1
concat
Diffusion Timestep
̂ a(1)
1
Vector-level PE
Layer-level PE
Multi-Head Attention
…a(1)
L b(1)
L a(r)
L b(r)
L
concat concat
… ̂ a(r)
L
̂ b(1)
1
̂ b(r)
L
LoRA Layer Encoders
Figure 2:Diffusion Transformer with hierarchical LoRA layer encoder architec-
ture.For each layerl, we treat vector pairs (a (i)
l ,b (i)
l ) as tokens. Vector-level positional
encodings capture rank dimension indices, followed by multi-head attention that models
interactions among therrank components within the layer. This hierarchical design en-
ables the model to learn both local (within-layer) dependencies among rank components
and global (cross-layer) relationships across different layers of the neural field.
weight modulation. This modulation mechanism naturally aligns with our multiplicative
LoRA formulation, and the architecture is applicable, but not limited, to 2D and 3D data.
We train the base model using the variational autodecoder paradigm Park et al. (2019).
This training scheme is desirable because it requires no encoder design, aligning with the
data-agnostic quality of INRs. Given a dataset{x i}N
i=1, we jointly optimize the network
parametersθand per-instance latent codes{z i}N
i=1 by solving
min
θ,{zi}
NX
i=1
Lrecon(fθ(p,z i),x i(p)) +λ r∥zi∥2
2 ,(4)
whereprepresents spatial coordinates andλ r controls the latent code regularization.
3.4 Asymmetric Mask for Permutation Symmetry
Permutation symmetry refers to the invariance of network functions under neuron reorder-
ing, which causes functionally identical networks to occupy vastly different locations in
weight space Zhao et al. (2025); Gao & Others (2024); Navon et al. (2023). Although LoRA
weights converge to a certain subspace Hu et al. (2022), permutation symmetry remains
present even within LoRA parameterizations, affecting both additive and multiplicative for-
mulations. In additive LoRA, the operationBAcan be viewed as a two layer network:A
acts as an encoder compressing torhidden activations, andBacts as a decoder expand-
ing back. Permuting theserhidden dimensions preserves the function, inducing anr!-fold
symmetry. In multiplicative LoRA, the adapted weight matrix decomposes into a sum of
terms, each being the base weight matrix scaled by diagonal matrices. Permuting the rank
dimensions in this sum preserves the output due to commutative addition, again leading
to permutation symmetry. We provide formal proofs for both cases in the appendix. No-
tably, multiplicative LoRA weights are aligned with base network channels once permutation
symmetry is eliminated, see Corollary 2.2.
To address this symmetry, we investigate the asymmetric masking technique of Lim et al.
(2024b), designed to eliminate permutation symmetry during optimization. For each layer,
we randomly freeze √dout entries in each row of the weight matrix, whered out is the out
dimension. The frozen entries and their positions are shared across different runs. The
values of the frozen entries are determined as follows. Suppose entryW ij is chosen to be
fixed. For the standalone MLP and additive LoRA, we initialize the frozen entries with
higher variance:W ij ∼ N(0, κI). with the other weights being initialized withN(0,I). In
the case of multiplicative LoRA, we simply zero out the frozen entries:W ij ←0. This is
natural for the multiplicative formulation.
5
preprint
While asymmetric masking was originally developed for standalone MLPs and can be ap-
plied to all three parameterizations, it proves most effective for multiplicative LoRA in the
neural field domain. For standalone MLPs and additive LoRA, the technique requires large
varianceκfor the frozen entries to break symmetry effectively Lim et al. (2024b). However,
this is problematic for neural fields, which synthesize signals through additive composi-
tion. In this regime, fixing certain weights to large magnitudes creates entanglement: other
weights must compensate by canceling out these fixed signals, leading to difficult opti-
mization landscapes. Multiplicative LoRA avoids this issue by zeroing out frozen entries,
effectively removing certain signal components rather than forcing compensation. This ap-
proach aligns naturally with the multiplicative structure and avoids weight entanglement.
We validate this advantage empirically in our experiments.
3.5 Diffusion Model on Weight Representations
To evaluate the potential of the weight representations in generative tasks, we train diffusion
models to learn their distribution. Following the DDPM framework, we define a forward
diffusion process that gradually adds Gaussian noise to the weight representations, i.e.
q(ϕt|ϕt−1) =N(ϕ t;
p
1−β tϕt−1, βtI),(5)
whereϕrepresents the flattened weight parameters (either full MLP weights or LoRA
matrices), andβ t follows a linear schedule from 10 −4 to 2×10 −2 overTtimesteps.
We parameterize the reverse process using a diffusion transformer (DiT) Peebles & Xie
(2022) that predicts the noise added to the weights. For standalone MLP weights, we adopt
the architecture from Erko¸ c et al. (2023); Peebles et al. (2023). For LoRA weights, we design
a hierarchical LoRA layer encoder module that respects the structural properties of low-rank
weight matrices, shown in Figure 2. Each layerlis processed as follows. First, we treat
each vector pair (a(i)
l ,b (i)
l ) as a token, wherea (i)
l andb (i)
l are thei-th columns and rows of
matricesA (l) andB (l), respectively. Vector-level positional encodings are then applied to
capture the rank dimension index. A multi-head attention module withrattention heads
encodes the interactions among thervector pairs within the layer, allowing the model
to learn dependencies between different rank components. Finally, layer-level positional
encodings are applied to the aggregated layer representation before feeding into the main
transformer.
This hierarchical design is motivated by the compositional structure of LoRA weights.
Within each layer, the low-rank decomposition creates dependencies among therrank com-
ponents, which the intra-layer attention module explicitly models. Different layers, however,
operate at different semantic levels in the neural field, making layer-level encoding essen-
tial for capturing cross-layer relationships. This architecture naturally respects the paired
nature of LoRA matrices while enabling the model to learn both local (within-layer) and
global (cross-layer) weight space structure.
With the noise prediction networkϵ θ(ϕt, t), we optimize the simplified diffusion objective
L=E t∼U(1,T),ϕ 0∼pdata,ϵ∼N(0,I)

∥ϵ−ϵ ν(ϕt, t)∥2
.(6)
During inference, we use DDIM sampling to generate new weight representations, which are
then used to instantiate novel neural fields.
4 Experiments
We conduct experiments to inspect the structure of the weight space and evaluate weight
space representations across reconstruction, generation, and discriminative tasks.
Datasets.We evaluate on two datasets. For 2D data, we use FFHQ Karras et al. (2019),
which contains high quality face images. We evaluate at the resolution of 128×128, al-
though modest compared to current state-of-the-art in image generation, this resolution is
significantly higher than what previous weight-space methods Zhou et al. (2023b;a) have
evaluated on and therefore more challenging. For 3D data, we use ShapeNet Chang et al.
6
preprint
Table 1: Reconstruction quality. We report the PSNR for 2D FFHQ, the Chamfer Distance
×10−2 for 3D ShapeNet, and the number of trainable parameters in each weight space
representation. Parameters frozen by the asymmetric mask are reduced from the count.
FFHQ ShapeNet
PSNR↑# Params CD-A↓CD-M↓# Params
MLP 35.11 27,357 2.57 3.78 30,196
MLP-Asym 33.28 24,537 2.64 4.00 27,226
LoRA 35.69 27,395 2.44 3.39 29,696
LoRA-Asym 24.63 26,307 2.46 3.44 27,539
mLoRA 35.65 27,395 2.45 3.49 29,696
mLoRA-Asym 36.9126,307 2.41 3.3527,539
(2015), focusing on two settings: A single-category model trained on airplanes, and a multi-
category model trained on ten object categories including airplanes, chairs, tables, and other
common objects.
Candidate Representations.We compare six weight space representations: (1)MLP:
standalone MLP weights; (2)MLP-Asym: standalone MLP weights with asymmetric mask-
ing; (3)LoRA: additive LoRA weights; (4)LoRA-Asym: additive LoRA weights with asym-
metric masking; (5)mLoRA: multiplicative LoRA weights; and (6)mLoRA-Asymmulti-
plicative LoRA weights with asymmetric masking. This design allows us to isolate the
effects of parameterization (standalone vs LoRA), operation type (additive vs multiplica-
tive), and symmetry breaking (with or without asymmetric masks).
4.1 Reconstruction
The reconstruction task directly corresponds to the fitting procedure described in Sec-
tion 3.1, where each weight space representation is optimized to reconstruct individual
instances. For 2D images, we measure the PSNR (higher is better). For 3D shapes, we
measure the Chamfer Distance (lower is better). We also report the number of learnable
parameters for each representation.
Results. As shown in Table 1, LoRA, mLoRA and mLoRA-Asym achieve better recon-
struction quality while maintaining a compact parameter count, compared to the MLP-based
weight representations. We attribute this to the inductive bias provided by the base network,
which captures transferable features across instances, and fine tuning effectively leverages
these shared representations with minimal adaptation parameters. Multiplicative LoRA
perform better than its additive counterpart, echoing the wide application of multiplicative
modulation in generative neural fields Anokhin et al. (2021); Chan et al. (2020); Karras
et al. (2021). Surprisingly, mLoRA-Asym consistently outperforms mLoRA despite having
certain parameters frozen by the asymmetric mask. Our hypothesis is that the masking
further reduces parameter entanglement and thereby improves the reconstruction accuracy.
Also notably, LoRA-Asym performs poorly on FFHQ, likely due to increased parameter en-
tanglement caused by large varianceκ= 6 (empirically determined) of the frozen weights,
as discussed in Section 3.4.
4.2 Weight Space Structure Analysis
To understand the geometric properties of different weight spaces, we conduct a stabil-
ity analysis on the ShapeNet airplane model. This experiment examines whether different
random initializations lead to similar weight configurations after optimization. We indepen-
dently optimize two models for each instance, starting from different initialization points.
The first model is initialized withι 1 ∼ N(0,I), while the second is initialized with a (vari-
ance preserving) perturbed code
√
1−λ 2ι1 +λι 2 whereι 2 ∼ N(0,I) andλcontrols the
7
preprint
Figure 3:Weight space structure analysis.We measure weight similarity (cosine sim-
ilarity) and the linear mode connectivity barrier (Chamfer distance) as a function of ini-
tialization perturbation strengthλ. Each data point is averaged from 30 instances, the
underlying shades are indicative of standard deviation.
perturbation strength. The optimized weights from these two runs are obtained as
ϕ= arg min
ϕ′
Lrecon

fϕ′ (·|ι1),x

,
ϕλ = arg min
ϕ′
Lrecon
h
fϕ′

·|
p
1−λ 2ι1 +λι 2

,x
i
,
wherexdenotes the target instance. We evaluate two metrics to assess weight space struc-
ture. First, we measure weight similarity using the cosine similarity: A high cosine similarity
indicates that different optimization paths converge to similar weight configurations.
Second, to examine linear mode connectivity Frankle et al. (2020), we measure the barrier
height by evaluating reconstruction quality at the midpoint of the linear interpolation path.
Specifically, we compute the Chamfer Distance between the ground truth mesh verticesv gt
and the verticesv avg extracted via marching cubes from the averaged weights, i.e.,
b(ϕ,ϕ λ) = CD

vgt,M

fϕ+ϕλ
2

,
whereM(·) denotes the marching cubes algorithm and CD(·,·) denotes the Chamfer Dis-
tance. Figure 3 presents the results across varying perturbation strengthsλfor the six
candidate representations.
Results. Figure 3 reveals that LoRA and mLoRA improve weight similarity compared
to standalone MLPs. Specifically, weight similarity for MLP and MLP-Asym decreases
approximately linearly with perturbation strength, while LoRA-based representations ex-
hibit a saturation trend at large perturbation strengths. However, it appears that applying
LoRA does not improve linear mode connectivity. This is not unexpected since permutation
symmetry still exist in LoRA weights, as discussed in Section. 3.4.
Although not always improving reconstruction quality, the asymmetric mask improves
both weight similarity and linear mode connectivity across all parameterizations. Notably,
mLoRA-Asym exhibits exceptional behavior: weight similarity remains very high and the
barrier remains very low even with very different initializations. This suggests that mLoRA-
Asym weightsconverge to a linear mode. The reason is likely that multiplicative LoRA
weights are aligned with base networks, once permutation symmetry is eliminated, as we
prove in Corollary 2.2 in the Appendix.
Despite the application of the asymmetric mask, additive LoRA weights does not exhibit
good linear mode connectivity as mLoRA does. We hypothesize this is related to the internal
8
preprint
Table 2: Weight space generation performance on 2D FFHQ.
FD↓MMD-G↓MMD-P↓
HyperDiffusion 0.241 0.158 1.887
MLP-Asym 0.287 0.203 2.423
LoRA 0.321 0.169 2.018
LoRA-Asym 0.269 0.157 1.877
mLoRA 0.100 0.056 0.674
mLoRA-Asym 0.073 0.039 0.467
Table 3: Weight space generation performance on 3D ShapeNet. We examine a model
trained on a single categoryAirplaneand a 10-category modelMulti.
mMD↓COV↑1-NNA↓FD↓MMD-G↓MMD-P↓
ShapeNet - Airplane
HyperDiffusion 2.39 43.6% 78.2% 0.027 0.009 0.122
MLP-Asym 2.80 44.8% 80.9% 0.041 0.018 0.254
LoRA 116.4 3.1% 99.9% 1.553 0.669 7.163
LoRA-Asym 270.6 2.0% 100% 1.532 0.823 7.931
mLoRA 1.9646.2% 70.5%0.049 0.025 0.359
mLoRA-Asym 1.8943.4% 71.9%0.011 0.003 0.041
ShapeNet - Multi
HyperDiffusion 8.64 41.6% 78.3% 0.117 0.023 0.219
MLP-Asym 7.77 46.5% 74.0% 0.085 0.016 0.157
LoRA 152.9 10.9% 99.1% 1.014 0.319 2.501
LoRA-Asym 210.0 1.2% 100% 1.241 0.437 2.987
mLoRA 5.75 46.4% 61.9% 0.071 0.011 0.123
mLoRA-Asym 5.52 49.6% 58.6% 0.026 0.004 0.040
mechanisms of neural fields. Neural fields synthesize signals through iterative composition:
linear layers combine basic signal components, while activation functions generate harmonics
Y¨ uce et al. (2022). When neural fields are optimized on individual instances, their channels
become highly entangled. However, when trained on multiple instances in a generalizable
setting, the network learns transferable features and exhibits greater disentanglement Rad-
ford et al. (2021). This observation provides additional motivation for fine-tuning a base
network trained in the generative regime. Additive LoRA reintroduces entanglement by
mixing features across channels, whereas multiplicative LoRA preserves the channel struc-
ture through aligned feature scaling, avoiding additional entanglement.
4.3 Generation via Diffusion Models
We evaluate the generative capabilities of different weight space representations by training
diffusion models on each parameterization. This experiment tests whether the learned weight
spaces support high-quality generative modeling.
Implementation.For standalone MLP weights, we use the same diffusion model architec-
ture as HyperDiffusion Erko¸ c et al. (2023). For LoRA weights, we employ our hierarchical
LoRA layer encoder described in Section 3.5. For standalone MLP weights and standalone
MLP weights with asymmetric masks, we adopt the initialization technique from Erko¸ c et al.
(2023), which first fits one instance and then uses its weights to initialize all other fittings.
This can be viewed as fine tuning a small MLP fitted to one instance to other instances,
enabling direct comparison with the state-of-the-art weight space diffusion method.
Evaluation Metrics.For both 2D and 3D data, we measure the difference between the
distribution of the generated and reference samples. We compute the Fr´ echet distance
9
preprint
HyperDiffusion MLP-Asym LoRA LoRA-Asym mLoRA mLoRA-Asym
Figure 4:Qualitative generation results.Generated samples from diffusion models
trained on different weight space representations. The top 2 rows show results generated by
theAirplanemodel, followed by 2 rows from theMulti-class model. The bottom rows show
2D FFHQ generations.
(FD) Fr´ echet (1957), as well as the Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) calculated us-
ing a Gaussian RBF kernel (MMD-G) and a polynomial kernel (MMD-P), which has been
shown to be more reliable and sample efficient than the Fr´ echet distance Heusel et al. (2017);
Bi´ nkowski et al. (2018). These metrics operate on features extracted by deep learned models,
as deep learned feature extractors project the data into semantically rich embedding spaces
where distances better correlate with human perception of similarity. We employ these met-
rics in their mathematical form rather than using modality-specific implementations like FID
Heusel et al. (2017) or KID Bi´ nkowski et al. (2018), as this allows for consistent evaluation
across different data modalities. For 2D images, we use CLIP Radford et al. (2021) as the
feature extractor; for 3D shapes, we use a PointNet++ Qi et al. (2017). For 3D shapes,
following Erko¸ c et al. (2023); Vahdat et al. (2022); Luo & Hu (2021); Zhou et al. (2021), we
also report distance-based metrics: Minimum Matching Distance (mMD), Coverage (COV),
and 1 Nearest Neighbor Accuracy (1-NNA). These metrics use the Chamfer Distance to
measure shape similarity. Formal definitions are presented in the supplementary material.
Results.Quantitative results are reported in Table 2 for 2D FFHQ and Table 3 for 3D
ShapeNet airplane, and ShapeNet ten category datasets. Figure 4 shows visual comparisons
of generated samples. The quantitative results reveal several noteworthy patterns. First,
mLoRA-Asym achieves the best performance across nearly all metrics on both 2D and 3D
data, capable of generating diverse samples and capturing high-frequency details. This
superior generative capability correlates directly with its favorable weight space structure,
suggesting that weight space geometry is crucial for effective diffusion based generation.
On ShapeNet, HyperDiffusion demonstrates competent performance on the single category
airplane model, but degrades substantially on the multi category setting. This suggests
difficulty in modeling a diverse weight distribution spanning multiple object classes. On
FFHQ, HyperDiffusion fails to produce recgnizable face images, whereas both mLoRA and
mLoRA-Asym manage. This represents the first successful weight space generation for high
resolution natural image generation. Previous methods have been restricted to simpler
datasets such as MNIST and CIFAR. In contrast, LoRA and LoRA-Asym fail across all
settings. We hypothesize that this relates to their poor weight space structure caused by
entanglement of additive weights, as discuss in our weight space structure analysis. Overall,
10
preprint
Table 4: Classification and clustering results on the ShapeNet ten-category dataset. We
report the accuracy for two classification methods and the Adjusted Rand Score for cluster-
ing. All results are statistics from 10 runs with random data split and initializations.
Clustering ARI↑1-NN↑Logistic↑
MLP 39.3%±3.1% 50.0%±3.0% 78.1%±1.3%
MLP-Asym 48.4%±3.7% 46.8%±4.2% 82.1%±1.2%
LoRA 56.3%±3.3% 75.2%±1.7% 86.1%±1.1%
LoRA-Asym 47.4%±4.4% 59.1%±10.4% 84.3%±0.8%
mLoRA67.1%±3.7%85.1%±1.8%90.0%±0.7%
mLoRA-Asym 56.5%±2.7% 80.8%±1.6% 84.5%±1.4%
the strong correlation between weight space structure and generation performance validates
that structured, well behaved weight spaces are essential for treating network parameters
as effective data representations.
4.4 Discriminative Tasks
To evaluate the distinctiveness and semantic structure of the learned weight representations,
we conduct classification and clustering experiments on the ShapeNet ten-category dataset.
Classification.We evaluate two classification approaches. First, we use first nearest
neighbor classification, which assigns each test weight to the category of its nearest neighbor
in the training set using cosine similarity. Second, we train a linear classifier using logistic
regression. All classifiers take the flattened weight representations as input and predict
object categories.
Clustering.For clustering, we applyk-means withk= 10 (matching the number of
categories) on the weight representations. We evaluate the clustering quality using the
Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), which measures the agreement between the predicted clusters
and the ground-truth categories while correcting for chance.
Results.Table 4 reports the accuracy for the two classification methods and the Adjusted
Rand Score for clustering across the six candidate representations. We also present t-
SNE visualizations of the weight representations for the ten object categories in Figure 5.
Each point encodes one instance, colored by its category. The classification and clustering
results reveal a clear progression in semantic structure across different parameterizations.
LoRA outperforms standalone MLPs, mLoRA outperforms LoRA, and mLoRA delivers the
best results overall, achieving 90% accuracy with a linear classifier. Given that mLoRA-
Asym exhibits better weight space structure in terms of linear mode connectivity, thsi
result indicate that the discriminative power of the weight representation is not directly
linked to linear mode connectivity or permutation symmetry. The t-SNE visualizaitons
show that all weight representations are able to capture some level of semantic structure, as
same-category instances are positioned closely. However, only mulitplicative LoRA weights
demonstrate clear class seperation. These results substantiate that multiplicative LoRA
weight representations are capable of capturing semantic structure. Notably, recent work
weights2weightsDravid et al. (2024) similarly observes that LoRA weights that fine-tune
image diffusion model exhibit interpretable structure with semantic linear directions, echoing
our observations in the context of neural fields. Our finding further challenges the popular
view that neural network weights are uninterpretable, demonstrating that with appropriate
parameterization, weight spaces can encode semantic information.
5 Limitation
While our work establishes that neural network weights can serve as effective data repre-
sentations, several limitations present opportunities for future research.
11
preprint
MLP
MLP-Asym
LoRA
LoRA-Asym
mLoRA
mLoRA-Asym
Figure 5:t-SNE visualization of weight spaces.Each point represents one instance
from the ShapeNet ten-category dataset, colored by object category. Multiplicative LoRA
weight spaces exhibit semantic structure.
First, our approach requires finetuning a base-model which is computationally more ex-
pensive than fitting small MLPs. This requirement prevents evaluation on datasets with
hundreds of thousands of samples, constraining our experiments to datasets with thousands
of instances. Future work could explore methods to eliminate this requirement, or develop
more computationally efficient multiplicative LoRA adaptation procedures.
Second, we apply uniform parameter budgets across all layers in the neural field, treating
each layer identically in terms of LoRA rank and capacity. However, different layers likely
encode different levels of semantic abstraction, suggesting that adaptive parameter allocation
could improve efficiency and representation quality.
Third, while our method achieves the first successful weight space generation on relatively
high resolution natural images and demonstrates superior performance compared to prior
weight space methods, the generation quality does not yet match state-of-the-art image
generative models such as latent diffusion models. Future work could focus on closing this
performance gap while preserving data modality agnosticism.
6 Conclusion
We have demonstrated that neural network weights can serve as effective data representa-
tions when constrained through appropriate inductive biases. By adapting a pre-trained base
model via multiplicative LoRA, we transform the chaotic parameter space into structured
weight representations that exhibit semantic organization, enabling superior reconstruc-
tion quality, generation performance, and semantic structure. Remarkably, mLoRA-Asym
weights converge to a linear mode during optimization, and this structured weight space ge-
ometry correlates strongly with generative performance in diffusion models. These findings
challenge the view of weights as opaque byproducts of optimization and establish their via-
bility as semantic representations for reconstruction, generation, and discriminative tasks.
12
preprint
Appendix
7 Permutation Symmetry in LoRA
We provide a formal proof that permutation symmetry exists within both additive and
multiplicative LoRA parameterizations.
7.1 Permutation Symmetry in Additive LoRA
Theorem 1.The adapted weight matrix from additive LoRA exhibits permutation symmetry
with respect to the rank dimensions.
Proof.Consider the additive LoRA formulation:
W′ =W+BA(7)
whereW∈R dout×din ,A∈R r×din , andB∈R dout×r.
From a neural network perspective, the operationBAxfor inputx∈R din can be viewed
as a two layer network:
BAx=B(Ax) (8)
whereAacts as an encoder layer compressing the input torhidden activations, andBacts
as a decoder layer expanding back to the output dimension.
Leth=Ax∈R r denote the hidden activations. Consider a permutation matrixP∈R r×r
corresponding to permutationπ. We can insertP T P=Ibetween the two layers:
BAx=BP T PAx= (BP T )(PA)x(9)
Define ˜A=PAand ˜B=BP T . Then:
BA= ˜B ˜A(10)
This shows that (B,A) and ( ˜B, ˜A) produce identical adapted weight matrices. Concretely,
˜Apermutes the rows ofA(equivalently, permutes which hidden neuron each row corre-
sponds to), and ˜Bpermutes the columns ofBby the same permutation (matching the
hidden neuron reordering).
Since there arer! possible permutations ofrhidden neurons, and each permutation produces
a functionally identical network, the additive LoRA weight space exhibitsr!-fold permuta-
tion symmetry.
Remark1.This permutation symmetry is analogous to the well known permutation sym-
metry in standard MLPs Zhou et al. (2023a): reordering hidden neurons (along with their
corresponding incoming and outgoing weights) does not change the function computed by
the network. In LoRA, the hidden dimension is the rankr, and permuting this dimension
induces the symmetry. Figure 6(a) illustrates this symmetry, showing how the low rank
matrices can be viewed as encoder and decoder layers where intermediate neurons can be
reordered.
7.2 Permutation Symmetry in Multiplicative LoRA
Theorem 2.The adapted weight matrix from multiplicative LoRA can be expressed as a
sum of base weight matrices, each pre-multiplied and post-multiplied by diagonal matrices.
Proof.Consider the multiplicative LoRA formulation from Section 3.2:
W′ =W⊙BA(11)
whereW∈R dout×din is the base weight matrix,A∈R r×din , andB∈R dout×r.
13
preprint
W
A
B
+
αl−1
αl
W
αl−1
αl
diag(a1) diag(a2) diag(a3) diag(a4)
diag(b1) diag(b2) diag(b3) diag(b4)
+
(a) Additive (b) Multiplicative
W W W
Figure 6:Illustrating permutation symmetries within LoRA.(a) Permutation sym-
metry inadditiveLoRA. Low rank matricesAandBcould be seen as an encoder layer and
a decoder layer. The order of the intermediate neurons could swapped without changing the
output. (b)multiplicativeLoRA could be seen as parallel pathways with different scaling
factors for the input and output. The order of the pathways could be swapped without
changing the output.
We can decomposeBandAinto their column and row vectors respectively:
B= [ b1 b2 ···b r],A=


aT
1
aT
2
...
aT
r

 (12)
whereb i ∈R dout anda i ∈R din .
Therefore:
W′ =W⊙
 rX
i=1
biaT
i
!
=
rX
i=1
W⊙
 
biaT
i

(13)
For each term in the sum, the elementwise productW⊙(b iaT
i ) can be expressed using
diagonal matrices. Let diag(b i) denote the diagonal matrix withb i on the diagonal, and
similarly for diag(ai). Then:
W⊙(b iaT
i ) = diag(bi)Wdiag(ai) (14)
This can be verified by examining the (j, k) entry:
[W⊙(b iaT
i )]jk =W jk ·(b i)j ·(a i)k (15)
= (bi)j ·W jk ·(a i)k (16)
= [diag(bi)Wdiag(ai)]jk (17)
Therefore:
W′ =
rX
i=1
diag(bi)Wdiag(ai) (18)
This shows that the adapted weight matrix is a sum of terms, where each term is the base
weight matrix pre-multiplied and post-multiplied by diagonal matrices constructed from the
LoRA parameters.
Corollary 2.1.Permuting the rank indices{1,2, . . . , r}with a permutationπdoes not
change the adapted weight matrixW ′, as summation is commutative. This implies permu-
tation symmetry in the LoRA weight space.
14
preprint
coordinate
signal value
p
vp
Linear
Linear
Linear
sin
LeakyReLU
coordinate
p
Linear
Linear
Linear
sin
LeakyReLU
z
LeakyReLU
Mapping 
Network
sl
sl+1
× Nb+
signal value
vp
latent code
Linear
coordinate
p
Linear
Linear
Linear
sin
LeakyReLU
LeakyReLU
Al, Bl
× Nb+
signal value
vp
LoRA weight
Linear
Al+1, Bl+1
Optimize
Freeze
ϕ
W′ = W ⋅ diag(s)
W′ = W ⊙ BA
Legend
(a) Standalone MLP (b) Base Model - Training (c) Base Model - Adaptation
Figure 7:Network architectures for weight space representations.(a) Standalone
MLP architecture with Fourier Feature layer followed by two linear layers. (b) Base model
architecture with modulated fully connected layers. The network takes spatial coordinates
pand style vectorsas inputs, applying multiplicative weight modulation at each layer. (c)
LoRA adaptation applied to the base model, where low rank matricesAandBadapt the
frozen base weights.
This symmetry means that different configurations of LoRA parameters{a i,b i}r
i=1 can
represent the same function, making the weight space representation ambiguous without
additional constraints. Figure 6(b) visualizes this symmetry by showing how multiplicative
LoRA can be interpreted as parallel pathways that can be reordered without affecting the
output.
Corollary 2.2.Once permutation symmetry is eliminated, multiplicative LoRA weights
are aligned with the channels in the base network, i.e. each element corresponds to a single
feature channel.
Proof.In Equation 18, each term diag(b i)Wdiag(ai) applies channel wise modulation to the
base weight matrixW. Specifically, diag(a i) scales the input channels, while diag(bi) scales
the output channels. This operation preserves the channel structure ofWthrough element
wise scaling rather than mixing features across channels. When permutation symmetry
is eliminated through techniques such as asymmetric masking, each rank componentiis
uniquely identified and cannot be arbitrarily reordered. In this regime, each pair (a i,b i)
corresponds to a specific modulation pattern applied to the base network channels.
8 Implementation Details
8.1 Standalone MLP
As shown in Figure 7(a), The standalone MLP is a Fourier Feature Tancik et al. (2020)
layerα 1 = sin(ω0 ·(W 1p+b 1)) followed by 2 linear layers.
•ω 0 is the frequency scaling factor for the Fourier Feature layer. For 2D FFHQ, we
setω 0 = 32; For 3D ShapeNet, we setω 0 = 1. This value is chosen empiracally and
shared with its LoRA-based counterparts.
•N hidden is the number of hidden features in the linear layers. For the 2D FFHQ
model, we useN hidden = 94 for all layers; For the 3D ShapeNet, we useN hidden =
99 for all layers, in order to have approximately the same number of learnable
parameters as their LoRA-based counterparts.
15
preprint
As noted by Erko¸ cet al.Erko¸ c et al. (2023), an initialization trick is employed to ensure
diffusion model generalization. Specifically, an MLP with weightsϕ0 is fitted to one instance
from the dataset, and used as a shared initialization for all the rest of the fittingsι i =ϕ 0.
In other words, other instances are fitted by fine-tuning the weights from the first instance.
This trick is crucial to the performance of HyperDiffusion, and therefore we employ it in the
FFHQ and ShapeNet airplane experiments. However, in the multi-category experiment, it
does not make sense to initialize achairfitting with weights from anairplane, therefore we
do not use this trick and instead use a shared random initilization for all the fittings, like is
done for the LoRA-based weight representations.
For each instance, we run 10k steps, each step with 8,192 points with an Adam optimizer,
where learning rate adaptively decay from 10−2 to 10−5. The same optimizer and hyperpa-
rameters are used for the LoRA-based weight representations.
8.2 Base Model Architecture
The base model follows the modulated neural field architecture widely adopted in genera-
tive neural field works Anokhin et al. (2021); Karras et al. (2021); Chan et al. (2020), as
illustrated in Figure 7(b). The architecture consists of a mapping network and a synthesis
network. The mapping network is a multilayer perceptron that transforms a latent code
z∈R dz into intermediate style vectors{s l}L
l=1, whereLis the number of synthesis layers.
For 2D FFHQ, we usedz = 256 and an 8 layer mapping network with hidden dimension 256.
For 3D ShapeNet, we used z = 128 and a 4 layer mapping network with hidden dimension
256.
The synthesis network takes spatial coordinatespas input and produces signal values
through a sequence of synthesis blocks, each block contains 2 modulated fully connected.
The blocks are connected with residual connections to ensure gradient flow. Each layerl
first applies weight modulation, where the weight matrixW l is scaled by a learned affine
transformation of the style vector:W ′
l =W l ·diag(s l), wheres l =A ls+b l is computed
from the style vector via an affine transformation. The modulated weights are then normal-
ized per output channel asw ′
ijk =w ′
ijk/
qP
i,k(w′
ijk)2 +ϵ, whereϵ= 10 −8 for numerical
stability. The layer then computes activations asα l+1 = ReLU(W′
lαl +bl). For 2D FFHQ,
we use 6 synthesis blocks with channel dimensions 256. For 3D ShapeNet, we use 4 synthesis
blocks with channel dimensions 512.
8.3 Base Model Training
We devise a multistage progressive training strategy that gradually increases sampling res-
olution while decreasing batch size. Early stages use large batch sizes with low resolution
(batch size of 256 with 2,048 points per instance) to establish the latent code manifold, while
late stages use small batch sizes with high resolution (batch size of 16 with 32,768 points
per instance) to capture fine details. This strategy ensures stable latent code initialization
while maintaining computational efficiency.
We train 350k steps with an Adam optimizer, where the learning rate gradually decay from
10−3 to 10−5 in 5 stages. For regularization factor we useλ r = 10−4 Exponential moving
average is applied on the base model weights.
8.4 Dataset
For FFHQ, we use the first 5,000 samples from the dataset for all our experiments. For
ShapeNet airplane, we use all 4,045 samples. To create the ShapeNet 10-category dataset,
we select the top 10 categories with the most samples and then randomly sample 500 in-
stances from each category.
16
preprint
Algorithm 1Pipeline for weight space learning and generation.
1:Input:Dataset{x i}N
i=1, parameterization typeτ∈ {MLP,LoRA,mLoRA}
2:Output:Trained diffusion modelϵ θ
3:Stage 1: Base Model Training(for LoRA/mLoRA only)
4:ifτ∈ {LoRA,mLoRA}then
5:Initialize base model weightsθand latent codes{z i}N
i=1
6:Jointly optimizeθand{z i}via variational autodecoding:
7:θ ∗,{z ∗
i } ←arg minPN
i=1 Lrecon(f(p,z i|θ),x i(p)) +λ r∥zi∥2
2
8:Freeze base model:θ←θ ∗
9:end if
10:Stage 2: Instance Fitting
11:ifτ= MLPthen
12:Fit one instance:
ϕ0 ←arg min ϕ Lrecon(f(p|ϕ),x 1(p))
13:fori= 2 toNdo
14:Initialize:ϕ i ←ϕ 0
15:Optimize:
ϕi ←arg min ϕ Lrecon(f(p|ϕ),x i(p))
16:end for
17:else
18:Sample shared random initialization:ι 0 ∼ N(0,I)
19:fori= 1 toNdo
20:Initialize:ϕ i ←ι 0
21:Optimize:
ϕi ←arg min ϕ Lrecon(f(p|LoRA(W,ϕ)),x i(p))
22:end for
23:end if
24:Stage 3: Diffusion Model Training
25:Initialize diffusion model parametersν
26:whilenot convergeddo
27:Samplet∼ U(1, T),ϕ 0 ∼ {ϕi}N
i=1,ϵ∼ N(0,I)
28:Computeϕ t = √¯αtϕ0 + √1−¯αtϵ
29:Update:ν←ν− ∇ ν∥ϵ−ϵ ν(ϕt, t)∥2
30:end while
31:returnϵ θ
8.5 Pipeline
Algorithm 1 describes the complete pipeline for weight space representation learning and
generation. The process consists of three stages: First, we train a base model using vari-
ational autodecoding for LoRA based representations. Second, we construct a dataset of
weight representations by fitting neural fields to individual instances. For standalone MLP,
an initialization trick is employed where one instance is first fitted and then used to initial-
ize all other fittings. For LoRA based representations, all instances share the same random
initialization. Third, we train a diffusion model on the collected weight representations to
enable generation of novel instances.
For the diffusion model architecture, we use a standard Diffusion Transformer (DiT) Peebles
& Xie (2022) for standalone MLP weights. For LoRA weights, we employ the hierarchical
LoRA layer encoder described in Section 3.5 of the main paper. During training, we use the
DDPM objective with a linear noise schedule fromβ 1 = 10−4 toβ T = 2×10 −2 overT= 500
timesteps. For generation, we use DDIM sampling with 100 steps to efficiently sample new
weight representations. The diffusion transformer has 2880 hidden size (i.e., the size of each
token after linear projection or layer encoder), 12 layers, and 16 self-attention heads. We
17
preprint
train the diffusion transformer with batch size of 256 and learning rate of 2×10 −4 for 6000
epochs until convergence.
9 Evaluation Metrics for Generation
We calculate distributional metrics for both 2D and 3D. For 3D, we also calculate distance-
based metrics. All metrics are calculated between 2,048 generated samples and 2,048 ref-
erence samples.
9.1 Distributional Difference
These metrics operate on features extracted by deep learned models, as deep learned feature
extractors project the data into semantically rich embedding spaces where distances better
correlate with human perception of similarity. We employ these metrics in their mathemat-
ical form rather than using modality-specific implementations like FID Heusel et al. (2017)
or KID Bi´ nkowski et al. (2018), as this allows for consistent evaluation across different data
modalities. For 2D images, we use CLIP Radford et al. (2021) as the feature extractor; for
3D shapes, we use a PointNet++ Qi et al. (2017).
Given generated distributionPand reference distributionQ, to make the metric more
comparable, we first normalize the extracted features by
ρ← ρ−µ Q
σQ
for both the generated set and reference set, whereµ Q andσ Q are the scalar mean and
standard deviation calculated from the reference set.
Fr´ echet Distance (FD)Fr´ echet (1957) measures the distance between two multivariate
Gaussian distributions fitted to feature representations of generated and reference samples.
Given feature representations from a pretrained network, we compute the meanµ P and
covarianceΣ P for generated distributionPand meanµ Q and covarianceΣ Q for reference
distributionQ. The Fr´ echet Distance is then computed as:
FD(P, Q) = 1
Nfeature
[∥µP −µ Q∥2
2 + Tr

ΣP +Σ Q −2(Σ P ΣQ)1/2

].
whereN feature is the feature dimension of the feature extractor.
Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD)with respect to a positive definite kernelψis
defined by:
MMD(P, Q) =Ex,x′ [ψ(x,x ′)] +Ey,y′ [ψ(y,y ′)]−2E x,y[ψ(x,y)],
wherex,x ′ ∼Pare samples from the generated distribution andy,y ′ ∼Qare samples from
the reference distribution. This metric does not make the multivariate Gaussian assumption
and is reported to be more reliable and sample efficient Jayasumana et al. (2024); Bi´ nkowski
et al. (2018). We calculate this metric with 2 types of kernels.
1. Polynomial kernel (MMD-P)
ψp(x,y) = (γ p ·xT y+c) d with degreed= 3 and offsetc= 1. Following the practice
of KID Bi´ nkowski et al. (2018), we chooseγp = 1/Nfeature.
2. Gaussian RBF kernel (MMD-G)
ψg(x,y) = exp(−γ g∥x−y∥ 2
2) withγ g = 1/(2σ2
g); we chooseσ g =N feature.
9.2 Distance-based Metrics for 3D Shapes
For 3D shapes, we calculate distance-based metrics following Erko¸ c et al. (2023); Vahdat
et al. (2022); Luo & Hu (2021); Zhou et al. (2021). We denote the distance function as
18
preprint
Table 5: Ablation study of LoRA Layer Encoder on 3D ShapeNet - 10 category.
ShapeNet - Multi
mMD↓COV↑1-NNA↓FD↓MMD-G↓MMD-P↓
w/o 5.1847.7% 61.2% 0.049 0.008 0.098
with 5.5249.6% 58.6% 0.026 0.004 0.040
D(x,y) for the Chamfer Distance between two shapesxandy. The metrics are defined as:
mMD(P, Q) =Ey∼Q
h
min
x∼P
D(x,y)
i
,
COV(P, Q) =|{arg miny∼Q D(x,y)|x∼P}|
|Q| ,
1-NNA(P, Q) =
P
x∼P 1[N x ∼P] + P
y∼Q 1[N y ∼Q]
|P|+|Q| ,
where in the 1-NNA metricN x is the shape that is closest toxin both generated and
reference distributions, that is,
Nx = arg min
z∼P∪Q
D(x,z).
For mMD, lower is better; for COV, higher is better; for 1-NNA, 50% is optimal.
10 Ablation Study
We examine the effectiveness of the hierarchical LoRA layer encoder introduced in Sec-
tion 3.5. To isolate its contribution, we train a baseline diffusion model without the layer
encoder on the ShapeNet multi-category dataset. This baseline treats each weight matrix as
an independent token, directly feeding flattened LoRA matrices into the transformer with-
out the hierarchical processing that models within layer rank dependencies and cross layer
relationships.
Table 5 compares the baseline against our full model with the hierarchical layer encoder.
The results demonstrate that the layer encoder provides substantial improvements across all
metrics. The full model achieves higher coverage (49.6% vs 47.7%), better 1-NNA (58.6%
vs 61.2%), and significantly better distributional metrics: FD improves from 0.049 to 0.026,
MMD-G from 0.008 to 0.004, and MMD-P from 0.098 to 0.040. These improvements con-
firm that explicitly modeling the compositional structure of LoRA weights, where rank
components within each layer interact and different layers encode different semantic levels,
is essential for effective weight space generation. The hierarchical design enables the dif-
fusion model to respect the intrinsic organization of neural field weights, leading to higher
quality generated samples.
11 Additional Qualitative Results on Generation
We provide additional qualitative results on diffusion generation. Please see Figure 8 for
results on ShapeNet Airplanes, Figure 9 for results on ShapeNet Multi, and Figure 10 for
results on FFHQ.
19
preprint
HyperDiffusion MLP-Asym LoRA LoRA-Asym mLoRA mLoRA-Asym
Figure 8:Additional qualitative generation results on ShapeNet - Airplanes.
HyperDiffusion MLP-Asym LoRA LoRA-Asym mLoRA mLoRA-Asym
Figure 9:Additional qualitative generation results on ShapeNet - Multi.
20
preprint
HyperDiffusion MLP-Asym LoRA LoRA-Asym mLoRA mLoRA-Asym
Figure 10:Additional qualitative generation results on FFHQ.
21
preprint
References
Ivan Anokhin, Kirill Demochkin, Taras Khakhulin, Gleb Sterkin, Victor Lempitsky, and
Denis Korzhenkov. Image generators with conditionally-independent pixel synthesis. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
14278–14287, 2021.
Miko laj Bi´ nkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying
mmd gans.arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401, 2018.
Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan:
Periodic implicit generative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. arxiv e-
prints, page.arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.00926, 2020.
Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang,
Zimo Li, Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An
information-rich 3d model repository.arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
Yinbo Chen and Xiaolong Wang. Transformers as meta-learners for implicit neural repre-
sentations. InEuropean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 170–187. Springer, 2022.
Amil Dravid, Yossi Gandelsman, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Rameen Abdal, Gordon Wetzstein,
Alexei Efros, and Kfir Aberman. Interpreting the weight space of customized diffusion
models.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:137334–137371, 2024.
Emilien Dupont, Adam Goli´ nski, Milad Alizadeh, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud Doucet. Coin:
Compression with implicit neural representations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03123, 2021.
Ziya Erko¸ c, Fangchang Ma, Cengiz¨Oztireli, and Pascal Fua. Hyperdiffusion: Generating im-
plicit neural fields with weight-space diffusion. InInternational Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023.
Amer Essakine, Yanqi Cheng, Chun-Wun Cheng, Lipei Zhang, Zhongying Deng, Lei Zhu,
Carola-Bibiane Sch¨ onlieb, and Angelica I Aviles-Rivero. Where do we stand with im-
plicit neural representations? a technical and performance survey.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.03688, 2024.
Jonathan Frankle, Gintare Karolina Dziugaite, Daniel Roy, and Michael Carbin. Linear
mode connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis. InInternational Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 3259–3269. PMLR, 2020.
Maurice Fr´ echet. Sur la distance de deux lois de probabilit´ e. InAnnales de l’ISUP, volume 6,
pp. 183–198, 1957.
Y Gao and Others. Revisiting model merging: A statistical perspective.arXiv preprint,
2024.
Cameron Gordon, Lachlan E MacDonald, Hemanth Saratchandran, and Simon Lucey. D’oh:
Decoder-only random hypernetworks for implicit neural representations. InProceedings
of the Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2507–2526, 2024.
David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V Le. Hypernetworks. InInternational Conference on
Learning Representations, 2016.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
Hochreiter. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equi-
librium.Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
T Hospedales, A Antoniou, P Micaelli, and A Storkey. Meta-learning in neural networks: a
survey. arxiv preprint arxiv: 200405439. 2020.
Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, Weizhu Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.
ICLR, 1(2):3, 2022.
22
preprint
Sadeep Jayasumana, Srikumar Ramalingam, Andreas Veit, Daniel Glasner, Ayan
Chakrabarti, and Sanjiv Kumar. Rethinking fid: Towards a better evaluation metric
for image generation. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9307–9315, 2024.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for gen-
erative adversarial networks. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik H¨ ark¨ onen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen,
and Timo Aila. Alias-free generative adversarial networks.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 34:852–863, 2021.
Sylwester Klocek,  Lukasz Maziarka, Maciej Wo lczyk, Jacek Tabor, Jakub Nowak, and Marek
´Smieja. Hypernetwork functional image representation. InInternational Conference on
Artificial Neural Networks, pp. 496–510. Springer, 2019.
M Kofinas, B Knyazev, Y Zhang, Y Chen, G J Burghouts, E Gavves, C G M Snoek, and
D W Zhang. Graph neural networks for learning equivariant representations of neural
networks. InThe Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
D Lim, Y Gelberg, S Jegelka, H Maron, et al. Learning on loras: Gl-equivariant processing
of low-rank weight spaces for large finetuned models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04207,
2024a.
Derek Lim, Theo Putterman, Robin Walters, Haggai Maron, and Stefanie Jegelka. The
empirical impact of neural parameter symmetries, or lack thereof.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 37:28322–28358, 2024b.
Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
2837–2845, 2021.
A Navon, A Shamsian, I Achituve, E Fetaya, G Chechik, and H Maron. Equivariant ar-
chitectures for learning in deep weight spaces. InInternational Conference on Machine
Learning, pp. 25790–25816, 2023.
O Ormaniec and Others. Fusion of graph convolutional networks via optimal transport.
arXiv preprint, 2025.
Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove.
Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape representation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
165–174, 2019.
William Peebles, Ilija Radosavovic, Tim Brooks, Alexei A Efros, and Jitendra Malik.
Learning to learn with generative models of neural network checkpoints.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.12892, 2023.
William S Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. 2023 ieee.
InCVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), volume 4172, 2022.
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. Pointnet++: Deep hier-
archical feature learning on point sets in a metric space.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 30, 2017.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini
Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervision. InInternational conference
on machine learning, pp. 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021.
C Singh and M Jaggi. Model fusion via optimal transport. InAdvances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 2020.
23
preprint
Jaisidh Singh, Diganta Misra, and Boris Knyazev6 Antonio Orvieto. Hyper-align: Efficient
modality alignment via hypernetworks. InWorkshop on Neural Network Weights as a
New Data Modality.
Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan,
Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let
networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains.Advances in neural
information processing systems, 33:7537–7547, 2020.
Arash Vahdat, Francis Williams, Zan Gojcic, Or Litany, Sanja Fidler, Karsten Kreis, et al.
Lion: Latent point diffusion models for 3d shape generation.Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 35:10021–10039, 2022.
Kushal Vyas, Ahmed I Humayun, Aniket Dashpute, Richard G Baraniuk, Ashok Veer-
araghavan, and Guha Balakrishnan. Learning transferable features for implicit neural
representations.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:42268–42291,
2024.
K Wang and Others. Scaling weight space generative models.arXiv preprint, 2025.
K Wang, Z Xu, Y Zhou, Z Zang, T Darrell, Z Liu, and Y You. Neural network diffusion.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13144, 2024.
Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany, Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Fed-
erico Tombari, James Tompkin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields
in visual computing and beyond. InComputer graphics forum, volume 41, pp. 641–676.
Wiley Online Library, 2022.
Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, Xiaochun Cao, Jie Zhang, and Dacheng
Tao. Model merging in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and
opportunities.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07666, 2024.
Gizem Y¨ uce, Guillermo Ortiz-Jim´ enez, Beril Besbinar, and Pascal Frossard. A structured
dictionary perspective on implicit neural representations. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19228–19238, 2022.
Bo Zhao, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Symmetry in neural network parameter spaces.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13018, 2025.
Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Kaylee Burns, Adriano Cardace, Yiding Jiang, Samuel Sokota,
J Zico Kolter, and Chelsea Finn. Permutation equivariant neural functionals.Advances
in neural information processing systems, 36:24966–24992, 2023a.
Allan Zhou, Kaien Yang, Yiding Jiang, Kaylee Burns, Winnie Xu, Samuel Sokota, J Zico
Kolter, and Chelsea Finn. Neural functional transformers.Advances in neural information
processing systems, 36:77485–77502, 2023b.
Linqi Zhou, Yilun Du, and Jiajun Wu. 3d shape generation and completion through point-
voxel diffusion. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, pp. 5826–5835, 2021.
24