IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 1
fMRI2GES: Co-speech Gesture Reconstruction from
fMRI Signal with Dual Brain Decoding Alignment
Chunzheng Zhu , Jialin Shao , Jianxin Lin , Yijun Wang , Jing Wang , Jinhui Tang ,Senior Member, IEEEand
Kenli Li ,Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Understanding how the brain responds to external
stimuli and decoding this process has been a significant challenge
in neuroscience. While previous studies typically concentrated on
brain-to-image and brain-to-language reconstruction, our work
strives to reconstruct gestures associated with speech stimuli
perceived by brain. Unfortunately, the lack of paired{brain,
speech, gesture}data hinders the deployment of deep learning
models for this purpose. In this paper, we introduce a novel
approach, fMRI2GES, that allows training of fMRI-to-gesture
reconstruction networks on unpaired data using Dual Brain
Decoding Alignment. This method relies on two key components:
(i) observed texts that elicit brain responses, and (ii) textual de-
scriptions associated with the gestures. Then, instead of training
models in a completely supervised manner to find a mapping
relationship among the three modalities, we harness an fMRI-
to-text model, a text-to-gesture model with paired data and an
fMRI-to-gesture model with unpaired data, establishing dual
fMRI-to-gesture reconstruction patterns. Afterward, we explicitly
align two outputs and train our model in a self-supervision way.
We show that our proposed method can reconstruct expressive
gestures directly from fMRI recordings. We also investigate fMRI
signals from different ROIs in the cortex and how they affect
generation results. Overall, we provide new insights into decoding
co-speech gestures, thereby advancing our understanding of
neuroscience and cognitive science.
Index Terms—fMRI Signal, Diffusoin Models, Neurosciences
I. INTRODUCTION
I
S it possible to decipher or comprehend human thoughts
directly from brain activities? Recent studies [1], [2], [3]
have shown the potential to decode various sensory stimuli
and mental imagery from brain signals recorded through both
non-invasive and invasive methods. This brings us one step
closer to the goal of neural decoding. The current research
in this field mainly revolves around two primary directions.
The first direction involves reading the perceptual contents
encoded in the human brain, such as reconstructing images
from brain signals [4], [2], [5]. The second direction aims
to understand cognitive information in the brain, particularly
This research was partially supported by grants from the National Nat-
ural Science Foundation of China (Grants No.62472157, No.62202158,
No.62206089), the science and technology innovation Program of Hunan
Province (Grants No.2023RC3098).
Chunzheng Zhu, Jialin Shao, Jianxin Lin, Yijun Wang, and Kenli Li are
with the College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Univer-
sity, Changsha, China (e-mail: zhuchzh@hnu.edu.cn; sjlljs176@gmail.com;
linjianxin@hnu.edu.cn; wyjun@hnu.edu.cn; lkl@hnu.edu.cn).
Jinhui Tang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China (e-
mail: jinhuitang@njust.edu.cn).
Jing Wang is with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: jwang@njust.edu.cn).
*Corresponding authors: Jing Wang and Jianxin Lin.
I could tellyou more about it but honestly l think it's probably best just to show it to you.
Gestures
Text
fMRI
Mapping Brain Activity to Text
Possible？
Fig. 1. Our work aims to directly reconstruct gestures from brain signals,
overcoming the challenge of lacking paired brain, text, and gesture data. We
achieve this by leveraging texts that elicit brain activity and corresponding
textual descriptions of the gestures.
linguistic decoding [6], [7], [8]. This area of study has
garnered considerable attention in neuroscience research due
to the distinctiveness of human language as an ability that
is not shared by other animals. An early attempt [9] built
a correspondence between brain activation and words by
predicting the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
recordings associated with concrete nouns. Prior to this ad-
vancement, our understanding was limited to the discovery that
distinct patterns of fMRI activities are associated with images
belonging to specific semantic categories [10], [11], [12].
After more than a decade of development, the research has
progressed towards more complex linguistic decoding tasks,
including word decoding [7], sentence decoding [6] and speech
decoding [13], [8]. However, one type of decoding that has
received little attention so far is co-speech gesture. To this
point, there have been no attempts made to predict continuous
gestures from cortical activities.
Co-speech gestures commonly occur alongside speech, and
these two elements are integral parts of human communication
and understanding [14]. With conscious or unconscious ges-
tures, speakers can better elaborate on the meanings behind the
speech content [15], [16], [17], [18]. Decoding gestures from
brain signals is critical to brain-computer interfaces (BCIs),
which can help people who are incapacitated or speech-
impaired to better communicate with others. It also provides
guidance for robots and virtual entities on how to mimic
human behavior. Despite its potential, this area has remained
unexplored thus far. This is probably attributed to the lack
of paired data encompassing brain activation recordings and
gestures. Obtaining such data is highly challenging mainly
arXiv:2512.01189v1  [cs.AI]  1 Dec 2025
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 2
due to the following reasons: 1) Some data collection devices,
such as fMRI scanners, typically require subjects to remain
as still as possible and avoid any noticeable head or body
movements, which contradicts the natural movement in gesture
collection. 2) The data collection process is time and labor-
consuming. For instance, the NSD dataset [19], which is
widely used for image reconstruction based on fMRI signals,
required approximately one year of collection. 3) There is a
limited number of volunteers, and only a small fraction of them
are willing to participate in invasive recording procedures.
Additionally, noise in the recorded signals and other factors
further complicate the task.
In this paper, we propose to investigate the brain-to-gesture
problem and introduce spoken text as an additional modality to
compensate for the data deficiency, as depicted in Fig. 1. The
rationale for leveraging text modality stems from its intrinsic
relationship with speech, while speech provides dynamic and
real-time linguistic expressions through acoustic signals, text
serves as its static written representation preserving identical
semantic content. This speech-text duality establishes a natural
bridge for connecting brain activities with gestures. On one
hand, gestures accompanying speech are inherently synchro-
nized with the semantic flow of spoken language. On the other
hand, the availability of paired brain, text and text, gesture
data allows for the exploration of the relationship between
brain activities and gestures through a hybrid approach that
combines both supervised and unsupervised learning. Note that
our study specially focuses on conversational gestures, namely
co-speech gestures, while excluding sign languages (e.g. ASL
[20]) and other types of gestures. Besides, we choose to utilize
fMRI data as the representation of the brain modality due to
its non-invasive nature, which allows for a wider range of
applicability and presents potential future applications [7].
Based on the analysis mentioned above, we propose a
novel approach, fMRI-to-Gesture Reconstruction with Dif-
fusion Models (fMRI2GES), which aims to directly decode
gestures from brain recordings. Rather than training a model
with supervised brain-gesture data, we leverage existing paired
{fMRI, text}and{text, gesture}data to train an fMRI-to-
gesture (F2G) model using unpaired brain-gesture data and
dual brain decoding alignment. Our training process comprises
two phases. In the initial phase, we construct an fMRI-to-
text (F2T) model and a text-to-gesture (T2G) model using
supervised learning methods, leveraging corresponding paired
data. With these models as a guide, we transition to training
the F2G model in an unsupervised manner in the second phase.
Given the absence of gesture data for specific fMRI recordings,
we develop a novel dual alignment strategy for training.
Specifically, we input an fMRI signal into the F2T model to
predict a text sequence, which is then passed into the T2G
model to generate gestures as pseudo labels. Concurrently, the
F2G model also utilizes the fMRI signal as input and produces
several gestures. The F2G model is optimized based on the
alignment of these gestures and the pseudo labels, and it stands
as the sole required model for inference.
To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first
attempt to decode co-speech gestures from brain activations,
thereby addressing a gap in the field of linguistic neural
decoding. The main contribution of our work is the proposal of
fMRI2GES, a method that enables brain-to-gesture decoding
without the need for paired training data of brain signals and
gestures. The proposed solution provides novel insights into
linguistic decoding, contributing to a deeper understanding
of neuroscience. By bridging the gap between brain signals,
language, and gestures, this work holds the potential to rev-
olutionize multi-modal communication technologies, offering
innovative solutions in human-computer interaction.
In conclusion, our main contributions are summarized as
follows:
•We introduce a novel fMRI-to-gesture reconstruction
method called fMRI2GES, which is the first attempt
to decode co-speech gestures from brain activation by
utilizing dual brain decoding alignment techniques to
directly decode co-speech gestures from brain activity in
the absence of paired data.
•We propose a dual decoding strategy by constructing an
fMRI-to-text (F2T) model and a text-to-gesture (T2G)
model, employing self-supervised learning to train the
fMRI-to-gesture (F2G) model, optimized through gener-
ated pseudo labels.
•Our experiments demonstrate the establishment of a con-
nection between brain activity and gestures, overcoming
the challenge of scarce paired brain-gesture data by
incorporating spoken text as a supplementary modality.
This research provides new insights into the fields of
neuroscience and cognitive science.
II. RELATEDWORKS
A. fMRI-to-Motion.
Motor imagery, the mental simulation of movement without
actual physical execution, has been a subject of significant
interest in neuroscience [21]. Specifically, Schulz et al. con-
ducted research on motor imagery, focusing on reach-to-grasp
movements of the right hand in various conditions [22]. Liu
et al. further introduced a novel approach to extract fMRI
features for discerning between left and right-hand grasping
movements, demonstrating the potential of fMRI in decoding
motor intentions [23]. fMRI signals have also been used to
study the effects of upper limb movements and whole body
movements on activating cerebral cortical networks [24], [25].
By monitoring brain activity, researchers can identify move-
ment intentions and translate them into actual movements of
the prosthetic limb [26], [27]. In the context of rehabilitation,
researchers analyze the activity in the brain’s motor control
areas to design customized rehabilitation programs, aiming
to facilitate the recovery of motor abilities in patients [28],
[29]. However, most existing fMRI-to-Motion works treat the
task as a motion classification problem. To the best of our
knowledge, there have been no prior studies trying to address
the continuous gestures reconstruction problem.
B. fMRI-to-Speech.
Decoding speech from brain activity is a long-awaited
goal in fields such as healthcare and neuroscience, the initial
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 3
iam runningi am walking
Decoderiam running afteriam runningalone
iam walking nextiam walking behind
Encoder iam running afteriam walking behind
Beam sequence (t-1) Beam sequence (t)SimilarityPredicted fMRI0.60.560.620.58Recorded fMRI
F2T
...Gesture sequenceNoisy GestureAdd noise
 ...Predicted GestureText condition
T2G
iam walking next to you
...
...
...
...Cross attention
Denoise
𝑥! 𝑥" 𝑥"#$𝑡
(a) Training phase I.
F2Tiam running after youT2G
 ...
...Pseudo Gesture
 Predicted GestureDual Alignment
Recorded fMRI
 ...
...Text  +
+    ?           ?...
xCross attention
F2G MSE loss
𝑡 𝜖!!(𝑥"#,𝑐$#,𝑡)
𝜖!"(𝑥"#,𝑐%,𝑡)
Decoded Text𝑡𝑥"#
𝑥"#
𝑐$#
(b) Training phase II.
Fig. 2. An overview of our fMRI2GES framework. In the first phase, we conduct supervised training that focuses on learning an fMRI-to-text (F2T) model
and a text-to-gesture (T2G) model. In the second phase, we leverage the Dual Brain Decoding Alignment mechanism to train the fMRI-to-gesture (F2G)
model in an unsupervised learning manner.
research on the relationship between the brain and speech
was to explore the role of various parts of the brain in de-
coding speech and to study the relationship between different
areas and speech through fMRI [30], [31], [32], [33]. This
further pioneered the prediction of brain activation patterns
through cross-language semantic decoding [34], [35]. Related
research analyzes brain activity patterns through fMRI, which
can spell or classify specific syllables, words or sentences
read by subjects. At the same time, the researchers try to
analyze the relationship between brain activity and different
sound characteristics to decode the speech content heard by
the subject [36], [37], [9], [38], [39]. Compared to speech
decoders for intrusive recordings, speech decoders for non-
intrusive recordings can be used more widely. Tang et al. [1]
created a non-invasive language decoder, used fMRI data to
build a non-invasive brain-computer interface, and translated
thoughts into continuous text or speech by decoding brain ac-
tivity, proving the feasibility of a non-invasive language brain-
computer interface. All these works collectively underscore the
richness of information embedded within fMRI signals and the
exciting potential to extend decoding capabilities to include co-
speech gestures, a critical aspect of human communication.
C. fMRI-to-Image.
Recently, the reconstruction of images from fMRI data
has gained significant attention, thanks to the rapid advance-
ments of deep learning techniques. Traditional fMRI signal
decoding involves manual fitting of fMRI data to generate
image features, but the outcomes of these methods tend to
be blurred and depend on manual configuration [40], [41],
[42]. With deep learning, some studies [4], [43], [44] use
semi-supervised learning to train the encoder-decoder structure
to solve the problem of insufficient matching pairs for fMRI
stimulus reconstruction. Many recent studies [2], [45], [46]
on reconstructing natural images have begun to introduce
text information, such as combining multi-modal pre-training
models CLIP [47]. Other works [5], [48], [49], [50] also
seek to leverage the powerful Diffusion Models [51], [52]
to reconstruct high-resolution images. The advancements in
fMRI-to-Image techniques have been an inspiration for our
approach to explore the application of diffusion models for
fMRI-to-Gesture reconstruction.
D. Co-speech Gesture Generation.
For traditional Co-speech Gesture Generation, various rule-
based approaches [53], [54], [55], [56], [57] were adopted,
and recent research has turned to neural networks to achieve
mapping to gestures in an end-to-end manner. These models
employ various neural network architectures, including CNN
[58], RNN [59], and Transformer [60], to achieve more natural
gesture generation. To improve the fidelity and expressiveness
of gesture generation, researchers have introduced probabilistic
modeling techniques such as V AEs [61], VQ-V AEs [62],
[63], normalized flow [64], and GANs [65], [66]. Diffusion
models also show potential for capturing complex gesture
distributions and have produced impressive performance in
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 4
co-speech gesture generation [67], [68], [69], [70]. Based on
this, we further explore the diffusion model to capture gesture-
related information in fMRI signals extracted from complex
brain activities.
III. METHOD
In this section, we present a novel fMRI-to-Gesture Re-
construction with Diffusion Models (fMRI2GES) framework
for directly decoding gestures from fMRI signals. Since there
is no paired{fMRI, gesture}training corpus, we attempt
to solve the mapping between fMRI recordings and their
corresponding co-speech gestures, using two paired{fMRI,
text}and{text, gesture}datasets. Our training process consists
of two phases, as illustrated in Fig. 2. In the first phase, we
conduct supervised training that focuses on the transition from
fMRI to text and from text to gesture, learning an fMRI-to-text
(F2T) model and a text-to-gesture (T2G) model. In the second
phase, we shift our focus to training the fMRI-to-gesture (F2G)
model, leveraging the F2T and T2G models obtained during
the first phase. This two-phase training strategy, combining
both supervised and unsupervised learning, enables us to
harness the power of both labeled and unlabeled data for
effective training and improved model performance. It is worth
noting that the data across all modalities remain temporally
aligned during the reverse process, ensuring that the sequence
c′
x, obtained by F2T, has been preprocessed and encoded
through duplication. Furthermore, the gesture sequencex ′
t is
aligned with the fMRI signals from the relevant brain regions
utilized in various experiments during data preprocessing, as
detailed in IV-B.
A. Problem Formulation
Notation.Given a record of fMRI, the task of fMRI-to-
gesture reconstruction is to predict a sequence of gesturesx
that is compliant to the semantic information of the stimuli
which evokes the brain activity, wherec f ∈R N×Df isN
segments of fMRI signals, each consisting ofD f voxels,
x∈R N×98 is a sequence ofNgestures with 49 2D-keypoint
coordinates. The output of the F2T model and the input of
the T2G model are sequences of utterance words, with the
embedding denoted asc x ∈R N×Dx. We ensure that the
lengths of the words, fMRI signals and gesture frames are
identical. To achieve this, we replicate a word and a segment
of fMRI recording when they are related to multiple frames
in the original data [71]. In light of the foundation of our
T2G and F2G models on diffusion models, we begin by
explaining how to execute gesture generation using denoising
diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) [51]. The diffusion
model encompasses two distinct processes, namely, a forward
process and a reverse process.
Forward Process.In the forward diffusion process, Gaus-
sian noise is progressively introduced to the source gesture
sequencex 0, which is sampled from data distributionq(x 0).
Given a variance scheduleβ 1, . . . , βT , the forward process
adheres to a Markov chain. Fort∈(0, T], the state transition
fromx t−1 tox t is calculated as:
q(xt|xt−1) :=N(x t;
p
1−β txt−1, βtI).(1)
The forward process provides an estimation of the posterior
distributionq(x 1:T |x0) = QT
t=1 q(xt|xt−1), wherex 1:T rep-
resents latent variables with dimensions matchingx 0.
Reverse Process.The reverse process, denoted asp θ(x0:T ),
aims to restore the original gesture sequence. This process
also follows a Markovian scheme, featuring learned Gaussian
transitions that initiate fromx T ∼ N(0,I). The reverse
operation of the continuous diffusion process maintains an
identical transition distribution structure [51]. This insight
encourages us to employ a Gaussian transition for modeling
pθ(xt−1|xt)within an unconditional context:
pθ(xt−1|xt) :=N(x t−1;µ θ(xt, t),Σθ(xt, t)),(2)
where the corrupted noisy datax t is sampled byq(x t|x0) =
N(x t; √¯αtx0,(1−¯αt)I),α t = 1−β t and¯αt = Qt
s=1 αs.
Training Objective.The whole diffusion network can be
optimized with the loss function:
L(θ) =E q
" TX
t=2
DKL(q(xt−1|xt, x0)||pθ(xt−1|xt))
#
.(3)
Through reparameterization [72], we can further simplify the
training objective to the form of MSE loss as:
L(θ) =E ϵ,t∥ϵ−ϵ θ(xt, t)∥2
2.(4)
B. Decoding text from fMRI Signals
As is well known, fMRI uses the blood-oxygen-level-
dependent (BOLD) signal to capture brain images by tracing
the changes in the blood flow. A neural spike results in
approximately 10 seconds of fluctuation in the BOLD signal,
which means that fMRI has a naturally low temporal resolution
[1]. In the same 10 seconds, a native English speaker can speak
around 20 words, which is significantly more than the number
of brain images. This presents an ill-posed problem for fMRI-
to-text decoding.
To address the aforementioned issue, we develop the F2T
model based on the approach proposed in [1], utilizing
the strategy of envisioning candidate sequences. To enhance
contextual understanding and achieve more natural language
decoding, we integrate GPT-2 [73] with a kernel sampling
strategy. By leveraging GPT-2 to predict multiple possible
word sequences, the probabilistic distribution of the language
model compensates for insufficient temporal sampling. The
candidate sequences are then filtered by an encoding model
to select the optimal solution. Specifically, the F2T model
consists of a decoder and an encoder, as depicted in Fig.
2(a). The decoder aims to efficiently decode text sequences
from fMRI signals, while the encoder evaluates the candidate
sequences by predicting brain activities given these sequences.
Technically, given fMRI signalc f ∈R N×Df containingN
segments withD f voxels, we formulate the decoding task
using Bayes’ theorem as:
ˆw1:M =argmax
w1:M
pθ(w1:M |cf )| {z }
Posterior
∝p LM(w1:M )| {z }
Language prior
·p ϕ(cf |w1:M )| {z }
Brain likelihood
,
(5)
whereθdenotes decoder parameters for text generation,ϕ
indicates encoder parameters for brain activity prediction, the
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 5
language priorp LM(w1:M )ensures fluency using GPT-2, and
w1:M denotes the decoded word sequence. To align the low-
resolution fMRI segments with high-rate word sequences,
we partitionc f into overlapping windows via dynamic time
warping, assigning each window to a subsequence of words.
The decoder generates candidate sequences using nucleus
sampling [74], which adaptively controls diversity through
probability thresholding. For each time stept, we first
sort the token probabilities in descending order, denoted as
P(w (1)
t |w1:t−1)≥P(w (2)
t |w1:t−1)≥. . ., and define the
nucleus set as:
Top-p(wt) = min
(
k∈N

kX
i=1
P(w (i)
t |w1:t−1)≥0.9
)
.(6)
From this set, we sample candidate extensions for each
sequence in the beam. At each time step, the encoder computes
the similarity between the predictedˆc f and the observed
cf to score candidate sequences. The top-khighest-scoring
candidates are retained in the beam, dynamically adjustingk
based on the entropy of the language model predictions. This
iterative process progressively refines the decoded sequence
c′
x fromc f , initializing with an empty sequence and contex-
tualizing via previously decoded words.
C. Text-conditioned Gesture Generation
Recently, it has been verified that diffusion models, such as
Stable Diffusion [52], have the capability to model conditional
distributionsp θ(x0|c)over conditionscby extending the UNet
backbone with a condition-specific encoder that employs a
cross-attention mechanism [75]. Motivated by this, we develop
our T2G model based on conditional diffusion models with
noise-free text inputs to eliminate semantic-irrelevant acoustic
artifacts. To better capture the interactions between modalities,
we leverage cross-attention mechanisms to investigate and
model the cross-modal relationship, ensuring a more robust
alignment between textual and gestural representations.
Technically, given paired text sequencec x and correspond-
ing gesture sequencex 0 sampled from real dataset, our goal
is to learn a model distributionp θx(x0)parameterized byθ x
that approximates real gesture distributionq(x 0)conditioned
onc x, which is realized by iteratively denoising the noised
latent statex t to the output gesture sequencex 0. According
to Equation 2, the reverse process of each time step can be
rewritten as
pθ(xt−1|xt, cx) :=N(x t−1;µ θx(xt, t, cx),Σ θx(xt, t, cx)).(7)
To specifically incorporate the condition into the reverse
process, we use a cross-attention mechanism to mapc x to
the intermediate layers of the UNetθ x:
Attention(Q, K, V) =softmax
QKT
√
d

·V,(8)
whereQ=W (x)
Q ·z t,K=W (x)
K ·c x, andV=W (x)
V ·c x,z t
represents a (flattened) intermediate representation of the UNet
implementing,W (x)
V ,W (x)
Q , andW (x)
K are learnable projection
matrices. We achieve deep fusion of text sequences and gesture
latent states. The network can be optimized using the same loss
Algorithm 1Training Process for fMRI-conditioned Gesture
Reconstruction
1:repeat
2:Sample(x 0, cx)∼q(x 0, cx),c f ∼q(c f )
3:c ′
x ←F2T(c f )
4:Samplet∼Uniform({1, . . . , T})
5:Samplex ′
t from T2G(c′
x)
6:Compute∇ θx,θf ∥ϵ−ϵ θx(xt, cx, t)∥2
2+
λ
q
1−¯αt
¯αt
ϵθx(x′
t, c′
x, t)−ϵθf (x′
t, cf , t)
2
2
7:Perform gradient descent
8:untilconverged
function conditioned on contextc x, as specified in Equation
4:
Lt2g(θx) =E ϵ,t∥ϵ−ϵ θx(xt, cx, t)∥2
2.(9)
D. fMRI-conditioned Gesture Reconstruction
The F2G model shares a similar structure with the T2G
model introduced in Section III-C. In this case, the condition
is transitioned to the recorded fMRI signals. Our objective
is to learn the model distributionp θf (x0), parameterized by
θf , which approximates the real gesture distributionq(x 0)
conditioned on the fMRI sequencec f . F2G also employs a
cross-attention mechanism to map the fMRI sequence to the
intermediate layers of the UNet, as elaborated in Equation
8. To enable the training of F2G, we develop the dual brain
decoding alignment mechanism, which relies on the pseudo-
labels generated through the cascaded F2T and T2G models.
In addition, there naturally exists a domain gap between
the decoded text sequencec ′
x (mainly about stories) from
fMRI signal and spoken textc x from real data (mainly about
television shows or university lectures). By using dual brain
decoding alignment, we can narrow down such domain gap by
fine-tuning the T2G model under both the new and existing
constraints.
Dual Brain Decoding Alignment.Considering the dispar-
ity in distributions between different datasets, we introduce a
dual-way decoding alignment mechanism for precise semantic
transfer and employ a conditional diffusion model to bridge
the gap between the two distributions by conditioning gesture
generation on textual descriptions and fMRI signals. In the
first branch, given the fMRI signalc f , we first obtain the
approximated text sequencec ′
x using the F2T model. Then,
a pseudox ′
t can be obtained by repeatedly sampling from the
reverse process of T2G, as described in Equation 7 in the
modelθ x. We assume a likelihood functionP(x 0, cf )that
represents the gesturex 0 falling within the data distribution
specified by the fMRI conditionc f . IfP(x 0, cf )is close to 1,
this indicates that the gesture conditionx 0 precisely fits the
data distribution described by the fMRI conditionc f . Given
this assumption, we would expect thatG f (x′
t, cf , x0) =x 0
for any noised latentx ′
t. We optimize the F2G model by
minimizing the MSE loss of the generated gesture and the
pseudo gesture:
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 6
Ldual(θx, θf ) =Ex′
t,ϵ,t
x0 −G f (x′
t, cf , x0)
2
2
=Ex′
t,ϵ,t
Gx(x′
t, c′
x, x0)−G f (x′
t, cf , x0)
2
2
=Ex′
t,ϵ,t

1√¯αt
 
x′
t −
√
1−¯αtϵθx(x′
t, c′
x, t)

−
1√¯αt
 
x′
t −
√
1−¯αtϵθf (x′
t, cf , t)

2
2
=Ex′
t,ϵ,t
r
1−¯αt
¯αt
ϵθx(x′
t, c′
x, t)−ϵθf (x′
t, cf , t)
2
2 ,
(10)
wherex 0 could be directly predicted fromx t using DDIM
sampling [76]:
x0 = xt√¯αt
−
√1−¯αtϵθ(xt, c, t)√¯αt
.(11)
The pseudocode for the training process can be found in
Algorithm 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Datasets and Metrics
1) fMRI-to-Text Dataset (F2TD):This dataset provides
paired{fMRI, text}data collected by Tang et al. [1]. It
contains fMRI recordings collected from seven subjects, com-
prising three female and four male participants, using a
3T Siemens Skyra scanner. The participants were asked to
receive auditory stimuli and create narratives without speaking,
while their brain activities were recorded simultaneously. Our
approach posits that the information from different subjects
responding to the same stimuli indicates that the brain activity
of one subject can be linearly expressed by that of another
[77]. This allows for the mitigation of individual differences
during ridge regression, resulting in similar decoding outcomes
across different subjects. The experiments are primarily on
voxel data from the auditory cortex and several speech-related
areas, which are closely linked to human language capabilities.
2) Text-to-Gesture Dataset (T2GD):The Specific Gesture
Dataset [65] is a comprehensive video dataset specifically
collected for the study of speech and gesture. It consists of
an extensive collection of 144 hours of videos featuring 10
gesturing speakers. The gestures performed by the speakers
are represented by 49 2D skeletal keypoints, including key
positions such as the neck, shoulders, elbows, wrists, and
hands, which are detected using OpenPose [78]. Additionally,
Asakawa et al. [71] enhanced the dataset by incorporating
text information into the videos through the use of the Cloud
Speech-to-Text service provided by Google Cloud. This pro-
cess further constructed the paired T2GD utilized in this paper.
3) Evaluation Metrics:Following [71], we quantitatively
measured the generated gestures by computing the errors
between the generated gestures and the reference gestures.
Since we did not have ground-truth gestures corresponding
to fMRI signals, we compared our generated gestures with
the gestures decoded from the corresponding text, verifying
the potential for fMRI-generated gestures. The mean absolute
error (MAE) and average position error (APE) were adopted
for this purpose. Intuitively, smaller MAE and APE values
indicate that the generated gestures are much closer to pseudo
gestures. Additionally, we also calculated the Probability of
Correct Keypoints (PCK) [79] and the Fr´echet gesture distance
(FGD) [80] of gestures. PCK is a metric of pose detection and
we used it to measure whether the keypoints of the gestures
generated by F2G and T2G are within a distance threshold.
FGD is often used for image generation measurement. We
employed it to measure the difference between the two gesture
distributions. Lastly, We utilize the Beat Consistency Score
(BC) [81], [82] to quantify the synchronicity of rhythms and
Diversity [83] to evaluate the range of distinctions in gestures
generated from different inputs.
B. Dataset Preprocessing Details
One speaker can speak many words and express his thoughts
with many gestures in a period of time [84]. In fact, the number
of words and the number of gestures are hardly equal to each
other, causing a many-to-many relationship between words
and gestures. Hence, we take into account the occurrence
time of each word from each video and align the words to
gesture frames at 15fps by duplicating these words, thereby
constructing the paired{text, gesture}data from Text-to-
Gesture Dataset (T2GD). The T2G model in phase I is trained
on the aligned T2GD. For the voxel-wise model, an fMRI
response often corresponds to multiple-word stimuli within a
repetition time (TR), where TR is 2s. Considering that the
text sequences and gesture sequences are strictly aligned at
every time point, the one-to-many relationship between an
fMRI signal and multiple-word stimuli requires us to align the
fMRI signals to the text sequences. We use the F2T model to
generate a text sequence from an fMRI signal, and words of
the text sequence are duplicated following the same strategy
of T2GD. The duplicated text sequences are used for the T2G
model in phase II.
Specifically, for fMRI signalc f within a TR interval and 15
fps gesture videos with 2D keypoints, each fMRI segmentc (i)
f
corresponds to a 2s video clip containingN=⌈15×2⌉= 30
gesture frames. The decoded words{c ′(w)
x }W
w=1 are replicated
ηw =⌈N/W⌉times to align temporal dimensions with the
indicator1 ηw , whereWdenotes the number of words per
TR. The alignment is formalized as:
cf =
h
c(i)
f , . . . ,c(i)
f
i
| {z }
Nreplicates
,c ′
x =


WM
w=1

c′(w)
x ⊗1 ηw

| {z }
Replicateη w times


| {z }
PW
w=1 ηw=Nreplicates
.(12)
Our approach simplifies the alignment by the process above,
eliminating the need for high-frequency fMRI sampling. This
is addressed by upsampling to compensate for information
loss, and we have conducted specific experiments to validate
its feasibility. Currently, our method remains straightforward
and exploratory. Future researchers could explore the inte-
gration of neural lag adjustments, which may enhance the
temporal alignment between fMRI signals and gesture data,
ultimately leading to more accurate reconstructions.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 7
TABLE I
ADVANTAGES OFF2T, T2GANDF2GMODELS OVER EXISTING METHODS.
Procedures Baseline fMRI2GES (ours) Improvement
fMRI to Text
•GPT-1 for language decoding
•Deterministic Beam Search for candi-
date sequences
•GPT-2 for language decoding
•Kernel sampling to stochastically ex-
plore candidate sequences
•Stronger contextual understanding
•Ensuring the decoding of more natural
and diverse sequences
Text to Gesture
•Noisy speech driven generation
•Weakly conditional KL constraint
•Self-attention mechanism
•Text-aligned noise-free generation
•Conditional MSE loss
•Cross-attention interaction
•Semantically guided accurate gestures
•Text-gesture tight coupling
•Enhanced cross-modal generation
fMRI to Gesture – None
•Dual brain decoding alignment
•Cross-modal latent space fusion
•Pseudo-label guided generation
•First fMRI-to-Gesture work
•Domain gap elimination
•Training in an unsupervised manner
C. Implementation details
In phase I, two models, F2T and T2G, are trained through
a supervised learning method with paired fMRI, text and
text, gesturedata respectively. The F2T encoder establishes a
correlation between the fMRI signals and the semantic infor-
mation of the stimulus words. Each of these stimulus words is
transitioned to a 768-dimensional semantic embedding through
a GPT-2 model [73]. An initial stimulus is constructed via a
three-lobe Lanczos resampling and 4-TR delays initial stimuli
are concatenated to construct the final 3072-dimensional stim-
ulus to predict an fMRI signalC f by the F2T encoder at time
t. Before decoding, a word rate model is established to predict
the word ratewfrom the corresponding fMRI signalC f
through the weights estimated by regularized linear regression.
When the word rate model detects new words at timet, the
language model GPT-2 generates the next possible words with
a beam widthkfor each of the latest candidates. The F2T
decoder maintains a beam ofkcandidates consistently that
present the most likely word sequences at timet, with the
beam search [85] and nucleus sampling [86] algorithms. In
the T2G stage, the text sequence is encoded by FastText [87]
as a text condition, and the text input vectors are processed into
N×300uniform-sized features. We propose the T2G model
based on the conditional diffusion model and use the cross-
attention mechanism for cross-modality study. Specifically, the
goal of the model is to obtain an approximately true gesture
distributionq(x 0)based on a given paired text sequencec x.
In phase II, the F2G model is trained with the fMRI data via
an unsupervised learning approach that combines the F2T and
T2G models. To effectively narrow the domain gap between
the decoded text sequencec ′
x derived from fMRI and the actual
spoken text, it is crucial to decode and align the gestures
generated by the T2G and F2G models at both ends of the
process. The first branch utilizes the pre-trained T2G model
from phase I to generate a gesture sequencex ′
t based on the
duplicated decoded text sequencec ′
x obtained from the fMRI
signal through the F2T model, usingc ′
x as a textual condition.
The second branch, F2G, employs a similar structure to
T2G but conditions on the fMRI signalc f . In this branch,
for each block of the Unet architecture, sinusoidal absolute
positional encoding of the time steptis added to the input.
The optimization objective involves minimizing the discrep-
ancy between the generated gestures and the pseudo gestures
through MSE loss, thereby achieving dual-way alignment. The
improvements of our approach compared to previous methods
are summarized in Table I.
For all the compared methods, we setN= 64frame clips
and strideM= 16. The number of gesture keypoints was set
to 49. For the potential dimensions of the fMRI signal, the
dimension of the auditory region was considered to be 1,431,
the dimension of the speech region was considered to be 498,
and the 10,000 voxels through cross-validation approach with
highest performance were selected as all regions. We fine-
tuned the T2G model after the first stage training, and the
loss balancing parameterλis set to 0.01. We employed the
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e - 4, and training
was performed on dual NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs
with a batch size of 32.
D. Performance Comparison and Analysis
1) Comparison of using noise or fMRI as conditions:To
verify the necessity of using brain signals, rather than random
signals, as generative conditions, we chose the noise condition
for comparison. This condition conforms to the standard input
format of the diffusion model and eliminates interference
from other modalities. By fixing the text modality input (T2G
generated results), we can independently compare the effects
of the noise and fMRI conditions on generative performance,
thereby isolating the semantic contribution specific to brain
signals. The quantitative evaluations of the gestures generated
by F2G using either Noise or fMRI as conditions are presented
in Table II. The metrics were computed by comparing the
generated gestures with the gestures produced by T2G (trained
in the first stage). When using fMRI as the condition, F2G
(fMRI) achieved a lower MAE and APE, and higher PCK and
BC, indicating that these gestures correspond more closely
with those from T2G. Moreover, the gestures generated by
F2G (fMRI) exhibited higher Diversity, indicating that these
gestures consist of more complex motions. In contrast, when
using pure noise as the condition, FGD was lower, possibly
because F2G (fMRI) integrates a new modality while F2G
(Noise) is only related to the text modality as T2G.
2) Comparison of using fMRI from different cortical regions
as conditions:In this experiment, we evaluated the impact of
using fMRI data from different cortical regions as conditions.
Given that the auditory cortex and language-related cortical
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 8
TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE EVALUATIONS(MAE, APE, PCK, FGD, BC,ANDDIVERSITY)OF THE GESTURES GENERATED USING OURF2GMODEL. PSEUDOGT
GESTURES ARE GENERATED BY THET2GMODEL.
Model Signal Evaluation Metrics
MAE↓APE↓PCK↑FGD↓BC↑Diversity↑
F2G Noise 0.929 1.453 0.20616.00.338 90.19
fMRI0.603 0.874 0.45125.10.628 163.7
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF RESULTS USING DIFFERENT FMRICONDITIONS FROM VARIOUS CORTICAL REGIONS. ’S+A’REPRESENTSSPEECH+ AUDITORY,WHILE
’MOTOR’REFERS TO THE MOTION CONTROL CORTEX.
Model Region Evaluation Metrics
MAE↓APE↓PCK↑FGD↓BC↑Diversity↑
F2G
All 1.248 1.800 0.215 63.4 0.341 92.25
S+A 0.607 0.911 0.444 24.5 0.619 164.8
Speech 0.621 1.029 0.43924.40.615166.3
Auditory0.603 0.874 0.45125.10.628163.7
Motor 1.182 1.652 0.225 61.8 0.358 95.4
F2G (Speech)
F2G (Auditory)
F2G (All)
cool
T2G
F2G (Speech+ Auditory)
I knowhe’s so 
Decoding …
…
Fig. 3. Gesture examples were generated using T2G and F2G. F2G (All) utilizes voxel-sampled fMRI data from the entire brain, F2G (Auditory) focuses on
auditory regions, and F2G (Speech) focuses on speech-related areas. Additionally, F2G (S+A) integrates fMRI data from both language and auditory regions.
regions are closely associated with the human language net-
work [1], which also participate in embodied cognition through
semantic-action associations [86], we focus on speech, audi-
tory, and motor regions. The results are presented in Table III.
Using whole-brain fMRI data, F2G (All), as a control group is
to verify the effectiveness of selecting function-specific brain
regions. The best MAE, APE, and PCK values were observed
for F2G (Auditory), with F2G (Speech) showing a slight su-
periority to F2G (Auditory) in terms of FGD. In contrast, F2G
(All) yielded inferior results across most metrics. This suggests
that for the task of co-speech gesture generation, the speech
and auditory areas contain more semantic information that can
represent gestures, while the brain activities from other areas
may introduce more noise information. F2G (Speech) and
F2G (Auditory) showed similar results overall, and combining
speech and auditory areas did not further improve the results.
This is possibly because these two areas share similar critical
semantic information for gestures, rather than complementary
information. Fig. 3 presents examples of the generated gestures
using T2G and F2G. This aligns with the finding in Table
III. It was found that incorporating the entire brain signal,
which may include more noisy information, had a negative
effect on the F2G model. F2G (All) produced gestures with
minimal motion, which were the least similar to the gestures
from T2G. On the other hand, utilizing signals from the
auditory or speech regions resulted in more accurate gestures,
indicating that both regions contain useful features highly
relevant to gestures. To determine whether gesture generation
primarily relies on semantics rather than motor cortex inputs,
we conducted ablation studies utilizing motor cortex fMRI
signals as the sole experimental variable. Using M1H signals
led to a significant performance drop, further supporting our
semantic-driven generation paradigm.
3) Comparison across different noise levels:To assess the
impact of noise levels on fMRI signals, we conducted an
evaluation by adding different levels of Gaussian noise to
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 9
TABLE IV
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT NOISE LEVELS ON VARIOUS EVALUATION METRICS.
Model (Region) Noise Level Evaluation Metrics
MAE↓APE↓PCK↑FGD↓BC↑Diversity↑
F2G (Auditory)
w/o noise0.603 0.874 0.45125.10.628 163.7
mean=0, std=0.1 0.617 1.014 0.426 24.0 0.593 143.9
mean=0, std=0.5 0.728 1.251 0.266 21.4 0.418 106.2
mean=0, std=1.0 1.134 1.451 0.18019.10.352 99.71
F2G (Speech)
w/o noise0.6211.0300.43924.40.615 166.3
mean=0, std=0.1 0.6240.9080.420 24.2 0.585 141.5
mean=0, std=0.5 0.762 1.155 0.276 22.4 0.428 103.6
mean=0, std=1.0 1.041 1.616 0.18818.60.347 98.25
fMRI data from the auditory or speech areas. The noise injec-
tion experiment was carried out using a controlled variable
method, performing a cross-comparison of noise responses
between the auditory and language cortices. The mean of
the noise (µ= 0) was fixed to avoid signal bias, while the
standard deviation (σ∈0.1,0.5,1.0) was gradually increased
to simulate different degrees of fMRI information loss. The
experimental results are presented in Table IV. Lines 1-4
represent the auditory cortex, while lines 5-8 pertain to speech-
related cortices. For example, when adding noise to the fMRI
data of the auditory cortex withσ= 0.1, minimal variations
were observed in the results, indicating minimal effects on
the gesture generation process. As expected, with an increase
in the noise level, all the metrics exhibited a negative trend.
Similar to the auditory cortex, we observed a comparable
phenomenon for the speech area, where higher noise levels
resulted in higher MAE, APE and lower PCK, FGD, BC, and
Diversity. By comparing lines 2 vs 6, 3 vs 7, and 4 vs 8, we
found that the noise had an equivalent impact on the model
conditioned on the fMRI data from either the auditory cortex
or speech-related cortices. Last but not least, the overall results
demonstrate the ability of our F2G model on capturing the
gesture semantics contained in brain activities.
4) Predicting brain activities using latent gesture represen-
tations:To validate whether the learned gesture representation
model captures the biological encoding mechanisms under-
lying brain gesture processing, we constructed an encoding
model to map the latent representations of the F2G model
to entire-brain voxel-wise brain activity. The latent gesture
representations were extracted from the last layer of Unet in
our F2G model, conditioned on fMRI data from either the
auditory cortex (referred to as the AC condition in the follow-
ing) or speech-related cortices (referred to as the SC condition
in the following). Following [5], we utilized ridge regression
as the mapping method and employed Pearson’s correlation
coefficients to measure the similarity between predicted and
reference fMRI signals. The prediction accuracy is depicted
in Fig. 4. Upon comparing the results, we observed that the
AC condition achieved better overall prediction performance,
yielding higher accuracy in the auditory cortex (AC) and
speech-related cortices such as the Broca’s area (Broca). In-
terestingly, we also observed high prediction results in several
other brain areas. For instance, in the upper subfigure, the
extrastriate body area (EBA), a component of the visual cortex,
①②
③④⑤⑥⑦⑧
①②
③ ④⑤⑥⑦⑧
Anterior
SuperiorSuperiorAnteriorLHRH
Prediction accuracy0 0.5
Prediction accuracy0 0.5Anterior
SuperiorSuperiorAnteriorLHRH
Fig. 4. Brain activity prediction performance assessed using Pearson’s
correlation coefficients, mapped onto the flattened cortical surface with the
occipital areas at the center, covering both the left and right hemispheres.
The prediction was conducted based on latent gesture representations extracted
from the Unet in F2G, conditioned on fMRI data from the auditory cortex
(upper) and speech-related cortices (lower). Brain areas:①EBA (extrastriate
body area),②AC (auditory cortex),③IPS (intraparietal sulcus),④Broca
(Broca’s area),⑤IFSFP (inferior frontal sulcus face patch),⑥S1H (primary
somatosensory cortex for hands),⑦M1H (primary motor cortex for hands),
⑧FEF (frontal eye fields).
was prominently highlighted in bright yellow. Additionally,
regions associated with motor and somatosensory functions,
such as the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), the primary motor cortex
for hand (M1H), and the primary somatosensory cortex for
hand (S1H), displayed more pronounced results compared to
the surrounding areas. These results demonstrate a mapping
relationship between our representation model and brain re-
gions implicated in gesture processing, indicating that using
auditory and speech-related fMRI signals is both reasonable
and feasible. Furthermore, the varying prediction accuracy
across brain regions provides insights into specialized and
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 10
TABLE V
HUMAN EVALUATION RESULTS FOR GENERATED GESTURES,RATED ON A SCALE OF1-5.
Metrics Naturalness Smoothness Human-likeness Content Match Understand-ability Diversity Overall rating
Speech2Gesture [65] 1.45 2.59 3.24 3.21 3.31 1.46 2.42
JL2P [88] 1.38 3.32 2.35 3.733.583.24 3.00
Trimodal [80] 3.54 3.23 2.87 3.12 3.01 3.12 3.30
DiffGesture [68] 3.563.683.01 3.48 2.81 3.61 3.14
EMAGE [89] 3.22 3.55 2.95 3.72 3.29 3.58 3.38
fMRI2GES (Ours)3.713.193.30 3.873.414.04 3.57
multimodal brain functions, which could enhance future efforts
to decode brain signals for applications such as brain-computer
interfaces.
5) Human evaluation:To further evaluate the quality of
the generated gestures, we conducted a comparative user
study involving the proposed F2G and several other gesture
generation methods. The selection of participants followed a
double-blind principle, where participants were unaware of
the correspondence between methods, and video sequences
were presented randomly. The evaluation dimensions covered
both low-level motion features (naturalness, etc.) and high-
level semantic features (content matching, etc.). Since the
model inputs vary, including speech or text, we synthesized
speech audio with text as needed. The comparison methods
are: 1)Speech2Gesture[65] uses spectrograms and employs
an encoder-decoder neural network with adversarial training to
efficiently map and accurately generate gestures corresponding
to the speech. 2)JL2P[88] learns the mapping from language
to animation in an end-to-end manner by jointly embedding
language and pose. 3)Trimodal[80] is an automatic gesture
generation model based on multimodal context, reliably gener-
ating human-like gestures that match the content and rhythm of
speech through an adversarial training scheme. 4)DiffGesture
[68] utilizes a diffusion-based framework for gesture genera-
tion, overcoming issues like mode collapse in GANs through
the use of Diffusion Audio-Gesture Transformer and Gesture
Stabilizer. 5)EMAGE[89] generates full-body gestures from
audio and masked gestures, utilizing the BEAT2 dataset and
a Masked Audio Gesture Transformer to enhance audio-to-
gesture generation and masked gesture reconstruction through
joint training, while improving gesture fidelity and diversity
with adaptive audio feature fusion and VQ-V AE. We invited
60 volunteers, including 30 females and 30 males, aged
between 18 and 35 years old, to participate in our study. The
volunteers were asked to rate the generated gestures based on
six criteria (naturalness, smoothness, human-likeness, content
match, understandability, and diversity) using a scale of 1-5,
as presented in Table V. The criterion of understandability
measured the extent to which the gesture enhanced the un-
derstanding of the speech or text content. The overall rating
was determined by calculating the average of the values for
all the criteria. Our analysis revealed that the proposed F2G
outperformed other methods in terms of naturalness, human-
likeness, content match and diversity. The best smoothness was
achieved byDiffGesture, which utilized a gesture stabilizer to
ensure temporal coherence. Overall, the participants generally
agreed that the F2G model produced high-fidelity results in
most aspects, thus verifying the effectiveness of the F2G model
in generating natural and effective gestures.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have addressed the challenge of decoding
co-speech gestures from fMRI recordings, advancing the field
of neuroscience and cognitive science. Our new approach,
fMRI2GES, leverages the power of Dual Brain Decoding
Alignment to train fMRI-to-gesture reconstruction networks
on unpaired data, overcoming the limitations posed by the
absence of paired{brain, speech, gesture}data. Our findings
not only demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed approach but
also elaborate on the intricate relationship between fMRI sig-
nals from different Regions of Interest (ROIs) in the cortex and
their impact on gesture generation results. This investigation
contributes valuable insights into how the brain responds to
external stimuli and enhances our understanding of the neural
processes associated with co-speech gestures.
By bridging the gap between fMRI signals and expressive
gestures, our approach not only pushes the boundaries of
neuroscience research but also holds promise for applications
in human-computer interaction, communication disorders, and
other domains. We believe that our work paves the way for
future advancements in brain decoding, with implications for
both theoretical neuroscience and practical applications.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Tang, A. LeBel, S. Jain, and A. G. Huth, “Semantic reconstruction
of continuous language from non-invasive brain recordings,”Nature
Neuroscience, pp. 1–9, 2023.
[2] S. Lin, T. Sprague, and A. K. Singh, “Mind reader: Reconstructing
complex images from brain activities,”Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 29 624–29 636, 2022.
[3] X. Liu, Q. Wu, H. Zhou, Y . Xu, R. Qian, X. Lin, X. Zhou, W. Wu, B. Dai,
and B. Zhou, “Learning hierarchical cross-modal association for co-
speech gesture generation,” inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 10 462–10 472.
[4] R. Beliy, G. Gaziv, A. Hoogi, F. Strappini, T. Golan, and M. Irani,
“From voxels to pixels and back: Self-supervision in natural-image
reconstruction from fmri,”Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[5] Y . Takagi and S. Nishimoto, “High-resolution image reconstruction with
latent diffusion models from human brain activity,” inProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2023, pp. 14 453–14 463.
[6] J. G. Makin, D. A. Moses, and E. F. Chang, “Machine translation of
cortical activity to text with an encoder–decoder framework,”Nature
neuroscience, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 575–582, 2020.
[7] S. Zou, S. Wang, J. Zhang, and C. Zong, “Cross-modal cloze task: A
new task to brain-to-word decoding,” inFindings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, 2022, pp. 648–657.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 11
[8] T. Proix, J. Delgado Saa, A. Christen, S. Martin, B. N. Pasley, R. T.
Knight, X. Tian, D. Poeppel, W. K. Doyle, O. Devinskyet al., “Imagined
speech can be decoded from low-and cross-frequency intracranial eeg
features,”Nature communications, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 48, 2022.
[9] T. M. Mitchell, S. V . Shinkareva, A. Carlson, K.-M. Chang, V . L.
Malave, R. A. Mason, and M. A. Just, “Predicting human brain activity
associated with the meanings of nouns,”science, vol. 320, no. 5880, pp.
1191–1195, 2008.
[10] S. J. Hanson, T. Matsuka, and J. V . Haxby, “Combinatorial codes in
ventral temporal lobe for object recognition: Haxby (2001) revisited: is
there a “face” area?”Neuroimage, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 156–166, 2004.
[11] A. J. O’toole, F. Jiang, H. Abdi, and J. V . Haxby, “Partially distributed
representations of objects and faces in ventral temporal cortex,”Journal
of cognitive neuroscience, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 580–590, 2005.
[12] S. M. Polyn, V . S. Natu, J. D. Cohen, and K. A. Norman, “Category-
specific cortical activity precedes retrieval during memory search,”
Science, vol. 310, no. 5756, pp. 1963–1966, 2005.
[13] D. A. Moses, M. K. Leonard, J. G. Makin, and E. F. Chang, “Real-time
decoding of question-and-answer speech dialogue using human cortical
activity,”Nature communications, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 3096, 2019.
[14] M. Studdert-Kennedy, “Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about
thought.”Language and Speech, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 203–209, 1994.
[15] J. Cassell, D. McNeill, and K.-E. McCullough, “Speech-gesture mis-
matches: Evidence for one underlying representation of linguistic and
nonlinguistic information,”Pragmatics & cognition, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
1–34, 1999.
[16] H. Cheng, L. Yang, and Z. Liu, “Survey on 3d hand gesture recognition,”
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1659–1673, 2016.
[17] J.-H. Song, K. Kong, and S.-J. Kang, “Dynamic hand gesture recognition
using improved spatio-temporal graph convolutional network,”IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 32,
no. 9, pp. 6227–6239, 2022.
[18] Y . Yao and Y . Fu, “Contour model-based hand-gesture recognition using
the kinect sensor,”IEEE transactions on circuits and systems for video
technology, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1935–1944, 2014.
[19] E. J. Allen, G. St-Yves, Y . Wu, J. L. Breedlove, J. S. Prince, L. T.
Dowdle, M. Nau, B. Caron, F. Pestilli, I. Charestet al., “A massive 7t
fmri dataset to bridge cognitive neuroscience and artificial intelligence,”
Nature neuroscience, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 116–126, 2022.
[20] T. ALLA, “The classifier system in american sign language,”Noun
classes and categorization, p. 181, 1986.
[21] S. H ´etu, M. Gr´egoire, A. Saimpont, M.-P. Coll, F. Eug`ene, P.-E. Michon,
and P. L. Jackson, “The neural network of motor imagery: an ale meta-
analysis,”Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, vol. 37, no. 5, pp.
930–949, 2013.
[22] L. Schulz, A. Ischebeck, S. C. Wriessnegger, D. Steyrl, and G. R.
M¨uller-Putz, “Action affordances and visuo-spatial complexity in motor
imagery: An fmri study,”Brain and cognition, vol. 124, pp. 37–46, 2018.
[23] T. Liu, B. Li, C. Zhang, P. Chen, W. Zhao, and B. Yan, “Real-time
classification of motor imagery using dynamic window-level granger
causality analysis of fmri data,”Brain Sciences, vol. 13, no. 10, p. 1406,
2023.
[24] N. Mizuguchi, H. Nakata, and K. Kanosue, “Effector-independent brain
activity during motor imagery of the upper and lower limbs: an fmri
study,”Neuroscience letters, vol. 581, pp. 69–74, 2014.
[25] A. J. Szameitat, S. Shen, and A. Sterr, “Motor imagery of complex
everyday movements. an fmri study,”Neuroimage, vol. 34, no. 2, pp.
702–713, 2007.
[26] M. Maruishi, Y . Tanaka, H. Muranaka, T. Tsuji, Y . Ozawa, S. Imaizumi,
M. Miyatani, and J. Kawahara, “Brain activation during manipulation
of the myoelectric prosthetic hand: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study,”Neuroimage, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1604–1611, 2004.
[27] R. O. Maimon-Mor and T. R. Makin, “Is an artificial limb embodied as
a hand? brain decoding in prosthetic limb users,”PLoS Biology, vol. 18,
no. 6, p. e3000729, 2020.
[28] J. D. Nunes, A. V ourvopoulos, D. A. Blanco-Mora, C. Jorge, J.-C.
Fernandes, S. Bermudez i Badia, and P. Figueiredo, “Brain activation
by a vr-based motor imagery and observation task: An fmri study,”Plos
one, vol. 18, no. 9, p. e0291528, 2023.
[29] D. M. Mehler, A. N. Williams, J. R. Whittaker, F. Krause, M. L ¨uhrs,
S. Kunas, R. G. Wise, H. G. Shetty, D. L. Turner, and D. E. Linden,
“Graded fmri neurofeedback training of motor imagery in middle
cerebral artery stroke patients: A preregistered proof-of-concept study,”
Frontiers in human neuroscience, vol. 14, p. 226, 2020.
[30] H. Ackermann, D. Wildgruber, I. Daum, and W. Grodd, “Does the cere-
bellum contribute to cognitive aspects of speech production? a functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fmri) study in humans.”Neuroscience
Letters, vol. 247, no. 2-3, pp. 187–190, 1998.
[31] H. Ackermann, K. Mathiak, and A. Riecker, “The contribution of the
cerebellum to speech production and speech perception: clinical and
functional imaging data,”The cerebellum, vol. 6, pp. 202–213, 2007.
[32] G. Hickok, B. Buchsbaum, C. Humphries, and T. Muftuler, “Auditory–
motor interaction revealed by fmri: speech, music, and working memory
in area spt,”Journal of cognitive neuroscience, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 673–
682, 2003.
[33] Y . Song, L. Guo, M. Man, and Y . Wu, “The spiking neural network
based on fmri for speech recognition,”Pattern Recognition, p. 110672,
2024.
[34] Y . Yang, J. Wang, C. Bailer, V . Cherkassky, and M. A. Just, “Com-
monalities and differences in the neural representations of english,
portuguese, and mandarin sentences: When knowledge of the brain-
language mappings for two languages is better than one,”Brain and
language, vol. 175, pp. 77–85, 2017.
[35] ——, “Commonality of neural representations of sentences across lan-
guages: Predicting brain activation during portuguese sentence compre-
hension using an english-based model of brain function,”Neuroimage,
vol. 146, pp. 658–666, 2017.
[36] A. Buchweitz, S. V . Shinkareva, R. A. Mason, T. M. Mitchell, and
M. A. Just, “Identifying bilingual semantic neural representations across
languages,”Brain and language, vol. 120, no. 3, pp. 282–289, 2012.
[37] Y . Otaka, R. Osu, M. Kawato, M. Liu, S. Murata, and Y . Kamitani,
“Decoding syllables from human fmri activity,” inNeural Information
Processing: 14th International Conference, ICONIP 2007, Kitakyushu,
Japan, November 13-16, 2007, Revised Selected Papers, Part II 14.
Springer, 2008, pp. 979–986.
[38] B. N. Pasley, S. V . David, N. Mesgarani, A. Flinker, S. A. Shamma,
N. E. Crone, R. T. Knight, and E. F. Chang, “Reconstructing speech
from human auditory cortex,”PLoS biology, vol. 10, no. 1, p. e1001251,
2012.
[39] J. M. Correia, B. M. Jansma, and M. Bonte, “Decoding articulatory
features from fmri responses in dorsal speech regions,”Journal of
Neuroscience, vol. 35, no. 45, pp. 15 015–15 025, 2015.
[40] T. Naselaris, R. J. Prenger, K. N. Kay, M. Oliver, and J. L. Gallant,
“Bayesian reconstruction of natural images from human brain activity,”
Neuron, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 902–915, 2009.
[41] K. N. Kay, T. Naselaris, R. J. Prenger, and J. L. Gallant, “Identifying
natural images from human brain activity,”Nature, vol. 452, no. 7185,
pp. 352–355, 2008.
[42] Y . Fujiwara, Y . Miyawaki, and Y . Kamitani, “Modular encoding and
decoding models derived from bayesian canonical correlation analysis,”
Neural computation, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 979–1005, 2013.
[43] G. Gaziv, R. Beliy, N. Granot, A. Hoogi, F. Strappini, T. Golan, and
M. Irani, “Self-supervised natural image reconstruction and large-scale
semantic classification from brain activity,”NeuroImage, vol. 254, p.
119121, 2022.
[44] O. Chapelle, B. Scholkopf, and A. Zien, “Semi-supervised learning
(chapelle, o. et al., eds.; 2006)[book reviews],”IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 542–542, 2009.
[45] Y . Ma, Y . Liu, L. Chen, G. Zhu, B. Chen, and N. Zheng, “Brainclip:
Brain representation via clip for generic natural visual stimulus decod-
ing,”IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2025.
[46] H. Chen, Y . Zhang, X. Wang, X. Duan, Y . Zhou, and W. Zhu, “Dis-
endreamer: Subject-driven text-to-image generation with sample-aware
disentangled tuning,”IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology, 2024.
[47] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clarket al., “Learning transferable
visual models from natural language supervision,” inInternational
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[48] Y . Lu, C. Du, Q. Zhou, D. Wang, and H. He, “Minddiffuser: Controlled
image reconstruction from human brain activity with semantic and
structural diffusion,” inProceedings of the 31st ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, 2023, pp. 5899–5908.
[49] J. Huo, Y . Wang, Y . Wang, X. Qian, C. Li, Y . Fu, and J. Feng,
“Neuropictor: Refining fmri-to-image reconstruction via multi-individual
pretraining and multi-level modulation,” inEuropean Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 2024, pp. 56–73.
[50] M. Jian, R. Wang, X. Yu, F. Xu, H. Yu, and K.-M. Lam, “Unifrd:
A unified method for facial image restoration based on diffusion
probabilistic model,”IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology, pp. 1–1, 2024.
[51] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
2020.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 12
[52] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer, “High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,” inProceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2022, pp. 10 684–10 695.
[53] J. Cassell, C. Pelachaud, N. Badler, M. Steedman, B. Achorn, T. Becket,
B. Douville, S. Prevost, and M. Stone, “Animated conversation: rule-
based generation of facial expression, gesture & spoken intonation
for multiple conversational agents,” inProceedings of the 21st annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 1994, pp.
413–420.
[54] J. Lee and S. Marsella, “Nonverbal behavior generator for embodied
conversational agents,” inInternational Workshop on Intelligent Virtual
Agents. Springer, 2006, pp. 243–255.
[55] C.-M. Huang and B. Mutlu, “Robot behavior toolkit: generating effective
social behaviors for robots,” inProceedings of the seventh annual
ACM/IEEE international conference on Human-Robot Interaction, 2012,
pp. 25–32.
[56] S. Marsella, Y . Xu, M. Lhommet, A. Feng, S. Scherer, and A. Shapiro,
“Virtual character performance from speech,” inProceedings of the 12th
ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on computer animation,
2013, pp. 25–35.
[57] M. Lhommet, Y . Xu, and S. Marsella, “Cerebella: automatic generation
of nonverbal behavior for virtual humans,” inProceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 1, 2015.
[58] I. Habibie, W. Xu, D. Mehta, L. Liu, H.-P. Seidel, G. Pons-Moll, M. El-
gharib, and C. Theobalt, “Learning speech-driven 3d conversational
gestures from video,” inProceedings of the 21st ACM International
Conference on Intelligent Virtual Agents, 2021, pp. 101–108.
[59] Y . Yoon, W.-R. Ko, M. Jang, J. Lee, J. Kim, and G. Lee, “Robots learn
social skills: End-to-end learning of co-speech gesture generation for
humanoid robots,” in2019 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2019, pp. 4303–4309.
[60] U. Bhattacharya, N. Rewkowski, A. Banerjee, P. Guhan, A. Bera,
and D. Manocha, “Text2gestures: A transformer-based network for
generating emotive body gestures for virtual agents,” in2021 IEEE
virtual reality and 3D user interfaces (VR). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[61] S. Ghorbani, Y . Ferstl, D. Holden, N. F. Troje, and M.-A. Carbonneau,
“Zeroeggs: Zero-shot example-based gesture generation from speech,”
inComputer Graphics Forum, vol. 42, no. 1. Wiley Online Library,
2023, pp. 206–216.
[62] X. Liu, Q. Wu, H. Zhou, Y . Du, W. Wu, D. Lin, and Z. Liu, “Audio-
driven co-speech gesture video generation,”Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 21 386–21 399, 2022.
[63] P. J. Yazdian, M. Chen, and A. Lim, “Gesture2vec: Clustering gestures
using representation learning methods for co-speech gesture generation,”
in2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2022, pp. 3100–3107.
[64] S. Alexanderson, G. E. Henter, T. Kucherenko, and J. Beskow, “Style-
controllable speech-driven gesture synthesis using normalising flows,”
inComputer Graphics Forum, vol. 39, no. 2. Wiley Online Library,
2020, pp. 487–496.
[65] S. Ginosar, A. Bar, G. Kohavi, C. Chan, A. Owens, and J. Malik,
“Learning individual styles of conversational gesture,” inProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2019, pp. 3497–3506.
[66] S. Qian, Z. Tu, Y . Zhi, W. Liu, and S. Gao, “Speech drives templates:
Co-speech gesture synthesis with learned templates,” inProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp.
11 077–11 086.
[67] M. Petrovich, M. J. Black, and G. Varol, “Tmr: Text-to-motion retrieval
using contrastive 3d human motion synthesis,” inProceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp.
9488–9497.
[68] L. Zhu, X. Liu, X. Liu, R. Qian, Z. Liu, and L. Yu, “Taming diffusion
models for audio-driven co-speech gesture generation,” inProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2023, pp. 10 544–10 553.
[69] Q. Cheng, X. Li, and X. Fu, “Siggesture: Generalized co-speech gesture
synthesis via semantic injection with large-scale pre-training diffusion
models,” inSIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers, 2024, pp. 1–11.
[70] J. Chen, Y . Liu, J. Wang, A. Zeng, Y . Li, and Q. Chen, “Diffsheg:
A diffusion-based approach for real-time speech-driven holistic 3d
expression and gesture generation,” inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
7352–7361.
[71] E. Asakawa, N. Kaneko, D. Hasegawa, and S. Shirakawa, “Evaluation
of text-to-gesture generation model using convolutional neural network,”
Neural Networks, vol. 151, pp. 365–375, 2022.
[72] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” in
2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014,
Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings,
2014.
[73] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskeveret al.,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,”OpenAI blog,
vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[74] A. Holtzman, J. Buys, L. Du, M. Forbes, and Y . Choi, “The curious case
of neural text degeneration,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09751, 2019.
[75] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,”Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[76] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit models,”
inInternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[77] M. Ferrante, T. Boccato, F. Ozcelik, R. VanRullen, and N. Toschi,
“Towards generalized brain decoding of visual stimuli: Cross-subject
and dataset perspectives with a simple alignment technique,” 2024.
[78] Z. Cao, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei, and Y . Sheikh, “Realtime multi-person 2d
pose estimation using part affinity fields,” inProceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 7291–
7299.
[79] Y . Yang and D. Ramanan, “Articulated human detection with flexible
mixtures of parts,”IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 2878–2890, 2012.
[80] Y . Yoon, B. Cha, J.-H. Lee, M. Jang, J. Lee, J. Kim, and G. Lee, “Speech
gesture generation from the trimodal context of text, audio, and speaker
identity,”ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 39, no. 6, pp.
1–16, 2020.
[81] B. Li, Y . Zhao, S. Zhelun, and L. Sheng, “Danceformer: Music con-
ditioned 3d dance generation with parametric motion transformer,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36,
no. 2, 2022, pp. 1272–1279.
[82] R. Li, S. Yang, D. A. Ross, and A. Kanazawa, “Ai choreographer:
Music conditioned 3d dance generation with aist++,” inProceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021,
pp. 13 401–13 412.
[83] H.-Y . Lee, X. Yang, M.-Y . Liu, T.-C. Wang, Y .-D. Lu,
M.-H. Yang, and J. Kautz, “Dancing to music,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Wallach,
H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alch ´e-Buc, E. Fox, and
R. Garnett, Eds., vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/
2019/file/7ca57a9f85a19a6e4b9a248c1daca185-Paper.pdf
[84] S. Kita, M. W. Alibali, and M. Chu, “How do gestures influence
thinking and speaking? the gesture-for-conceptualization hypothesis.”
Psychological review, vol. 124, no. 3, p. 245, 2017.
[85] C. Tillmann and H. Ney, “Word reordering and a dynamic programming
beam search algorithm for statistical machine translation,”Computa-
tional linguistics, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 97–133, 2003.
[86] J. R. Binder, R. H. Desai, W. W. Graves, and L. L. Conant, “Where is the
semantic system? a critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional
neuroimaging studies,”Cerebral cortex, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2767–2796,
2009.
[87] P. Bojanowski, E. Grave, A. Joulin, and T. Mikolov, “Enriching word
vectors with subword information,”Transactions of the association for
computational linguistics, vol. 5, pp. 135–146, 2017.
[88] C. Ahuja and L.-P. Morency, “Language2pose: Natural language
grounded pose forecasting,” in2019 International Conference on 3D
Vision (3DV). IEEE, 2019, pp. 719–728.
[89] H. Liu, Z. Zhu, G. Becherini, Y . Peng, M. Su, Y . Zhou, X. Zhe,
N. Iwamoto, B. Zheng, and M. J. Black, “Emage: Towards unified holis-
tic co-speech gesture generation via expressive masked audio gesture
modeling,” inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 1144–1154.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY , VOL. 18, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020 13
Chunzheng Zhureceived his B.E. degree in 2022
from the School of Information Science and Engi-
neering, Minzu University of China, Beijing, China,
majoring in Data Science and Big Data. He is
currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Computer Science and
Technology at the College of Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Chang-
sha, China. His research interests include brain-
computer interfaces, medical imaging, and self-
supervised learning.
JialinShaoreceived his B.E. degree from
Zhengzhou University, Henan, China in 2023. He
is pursuing an M.E. degree with the College of
Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,
Hunan University, Changsha, China. His research
interests include ultrasound medical imaging,
self-supervised learning, and few-shot learning.
JianxinLinreceived the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from the University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China, in 2015 and 2020, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engi-
neering, Hunan University, Changsha, China. He has
authored or co-authored more than 20 papers in re-
lated conferences and journals. His research interests
include image and video processing, synthesis, and
understanding. He was the recipient of the top paper
award at the ACM Multimedia 2022.
YijunWangreceived the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from the University of Science and Technology of
China, Hefei, China, in 2014 and 2019, respectively.
She is currently an Assistant Professor with the
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engi-
neering, Hunan University, Changsha, China. She
has authored or co-authored more than 10 papers
in related conferences and journals. Her research
interests include multimedia understanding, natural
language processing, and data mining.
JingWangreceived the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, China, in 2015 and 2022, respectively.
From 2019 to 2020, she was a Visiting Scholar
with the University of Rochester, Rochester, NY ,
USA. She is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow with
the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China. Her research interests include com-
puter vision and multimedia analysis, with a focus
on vision and language.
JinhuiTang(Senior Member, IEEE) received the
B.E. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China,
in 2003 and 2008, respectively. He is currently a
Professor with the Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, Nanjing, China. He has authored more
than 200 articles in toptier journals and conferences.
His research interests include multimedia analysis
and computer vision. Dr.Tang was a recipient of the
Best Paper Awards in ACM MM 2007 and ACM
MM Asia 2020, the Best Paper Runner-Up in ACM
MM 2015. He has served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TNNLS, IEEE
TKDE, IEEE TMM, and IEEE TCSVT. He is a Fellow of IAPR.
KenliLi(Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
degree in computer science from Huazhong Univer-
sity of Science and Technology, China, in 2003. He
was a visiting scholar at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign from 2004 to 2005. He is
currently a Full Professor of computer science and
technology at Hunan University and Associate Di-
rector of National Supercomputing Center in Chang-
sha. His major research includes parallel computing,
grid and cloud computing, and DNA computing. He
has published more than 90 papers in international
conferences and journals, such as IEEE-TC, IEEE-TPDS, JPDC, ICPP, and
CCGrid.