GR-RL: Going Dexterous and Precise for Long-Horizon
Robotic Manipulation
ByteDance Seed
Full Author List in Contributions and Acknowledgments
Abstract
We present GR-RL, a robotic learning framework that turns a generalist vision-language-action
(VLA) policy into a highly capable specialist for long-horizon dexterous manipulation. Assuming
the optimality of human demonstrations is core to existing VLA policies. However, we claim
that in highly dexterous and precise manipulation tasks, human demonstrations are noisy and
suboptimal. GR-RL proposes a multi-stage training pipeline that filters, augments, and reinforces
the demonstrations by reinforcement learning. First, GR-RL learns a vision-language-conditioned
task progress, filters the demonstration trajectories, and only keeps the transitions that contribute
positively to the progress. Specifically, we show that by directly applying offline RL with sparse
reward, the resultingQ-values can be treated as a robust progress function. Next, we introduce
morphological symmetry augmentationthat greatly improves the generalization and performance
of GR-RL. Lastly, to better align the VLA policy with its deployment behaviors for high-precision
control, we perform online RL by learning a latent space noise predictor. With this pipeline,
GR-RL is—to our knowledge—the first learning-based policy that can autonomously lace up a
shoe by threading shoelaces through multiple eyelets with an 83.3% success rate, a task requiring
long-horizon reasoning, millimeter-level precision, and compliant soft-body interaction. We hope
GR-RL provides a step toward enabling generalist robot foundations models to specialize into
reliable real-world experts.
Correspondence:xiao.ma@bytedance.com
Project Page:https://seed.bytedance.com/gr_rl
1 Introduction
The emergence of large-scale vision-language-action (VLA) models has rapidly advanced the ambition of
building generalist robotic agents capable of performing a broad range of tasks given visual observations
and free-form natural language instructions. Recent systems [4, 7–11, 51] have demonstrated impressive
generalization across objects, environments, and semantic concepts, suggesting that robotics can benefit from
the scaling laws that propelled progress in vision-language models.
However, being general is not equivalent to being reliable, and current VLA policies still fall short in two
fundamental aspects for real-world deployment: (1)Dexterity with precision– millimeter-level control over
deformable objects remains unsolved. (2)Long-horizon robustness– errors accumulate over steps, and it gets
worse when coupled with high-precision dexterous manipulation. Consider the task of threading the shoelaces:
(1) the robot should be dexterous enough to handle the deformable objects, including both the shoelace and
the shoe; (2) the robot needs millimeter-level control precision to thread the shoelace into the eyelets; (3) the
1
arXiv:2512.01801v1  [cs.RO]  1 Dec 2025
Offline Filter ed Behavior 
Cloning
Morphological Symmetry 
Augmentation
Online Reinfor cement 
L earning
GR-RL
Pick Up the Shoelace Thr ead the Shoelace Pull the Shoelace
Figure 1GR-RL performs long-horizon, dexterous, and high-precision manipulation, in the task of shoe lacing, by
adopting a multi-stage training pipeline, consisting of 1) offline filtered behavior cloning with learned task progress, 2)
simple yet effective action augmentation, 3) online reinforcement learning.
robot also needs long-horizon manipulation capabilities to handle diverse and unexpected scenarios.
Our starting point is GR-3 [12], a large-scale VLA policy trained from internet data, robot trajectories,
and human demonstrations. Despite its strong generalization capabilities, GR-3 would fail when precision,
dexterity, and long-horizon robustness matter. We observe that there are two key bottlenecks: (1)suboptimal
human demonstrationsand (2) thedemonstration and inference mismatch. Under extreme precise and
dexterous manipulation scenarios, human demonstrators would slow down, hesitate, and introduce noisy
suboptimal demonstrations to the policy. In addition, during standard offline training, a VLA policy learns
to mimic human demonstrators by predicting action chunks offixed lengthsderived from a sliding window
given human demonstrations [14, 59]. However, to achieve smooth inference and control, post-smoothing to
predicted trajectories (e.g., temporal ensembling [59]), asynchronous receding horizon control [8, 14, 25], and
other control-level optimizations are often applied. These system-level optimization methods are necessary
for the smooth execution of a learning-based policy, while inevitably causing the mismatch between model
training and inference.
We present GR-RL for long-horizon dexterous and precise manipulation. GR-RL adopts a multi-stage
reinforcement-augmented training pipeline that filters, augments, and reinforces the suboptimal and mis-
matched human demonstrations. First, instead of directly running behavior cloning on the entire human
demonstration dataset, we initialize the base GR-RL VLA policy by cloning thefilteredtrajectories. Specifi-
cally, we train a critic model on both successful and failed trajectories with offline reinforcement learning
2
Vision-L anguage Model
Y ou ar e a 
helpful 
assistant
thr ead the 
shoelace 
thr ough ...
pr oprios
pr oprios
head 
v alue 
pr edictions
actions
nois y actions
rightleft 
Critic
Tr ansformer
Action Diffusion 
Tr ansformer
tar get v alue 
distribution 
cr oss entr opy
pr oprios action_t
... ......
Critic
Tr ansformer
kv
cache
Figure 2 The GR-RL Model.GR-RL adopts a Mixture-of-Transformer (MoT) architecture. It is co-trained on
robot vision-language-action trajectories via a flow-matching objective, and Temporal-Difference (TD) errors via
distributional reinforcement learning.
(RL) [17]. Given a sparse reward at the end of the episode, the predicted value naturally reflects the progress
of the task, which we further use to filter only transitions that contribute positively to the progress and
discard the rest. We adopt distributional critics and observe that they give much more robust performance
under offline sparse reward scenarios. Next, initialized from the offline pretrained checkpoints, we perform
online reinforcement learning to further explore and fix the failure modes of the base policy. In particular, we
achieve this by learning to steer the denoising process towards high-return regions [54]. Lastly, we devise a
simple yet effective method to augment the robot actions by mirroring the robot actions and observations,
with a flipped text description. Such a scheme drastically improves the overall success rate and generalization
capabilities of our policy.
To the best of our knowledge, GR-RL is the first model that can thread the shoelace through multiple eyelets,
achieving an overall 83.3% success rate. We hope GR-RL provides a step towards enabling generalist robot
foundation models to specialize and be applicable in challenging real-world scenarios.
2 The GR-RL Model
GR-RL adopts a Mixture-of-Transformer architecture, consisting of a vision-language-action (VLA) modelπθ
and a multi-task criticQϕ with a total of 5B parameters.
Policy: πθ controls a bi-manual robot with a mobile base by generating ak-length action chunkat = at:t+k
conditioned on the input language instructionl, observationo t, and robot statest,i.e.,a t = πθ(l, ot, st).
Following the architecture design of GR-3 [12], GR-RL uses Qwen2.5-VL-3B-Instruct [3] as the Vision-
Language-Model (VLM) backbone, and predicts the action chunksat with an action diffusion transformer
(DiT) trained by flow matching objectives [8, 33, 35]. Specifically, we follow GR-3 and use only the KV cache
from the latter half of the VLM layers for fast inference.
Critic:Similar to the policy πθ, Qϕ(ot, l,st, at)is a causal transformer that evaluates each action. Specifically,
we followQ-chunking [30, 47] and predict a chunk ofQ-values for each action chunkat and adopt distribu-
tional reinforcement learning [5, 16, 23, 47]. Different from unbounded regression-based policy evaluation,
distributional critics treat values as a discrete distribution with upper and lower bounds. This naturally
3
captures uncertainty in real-world trajectories. Under sparse reward settings, distributional critics give much
stronger robustness than the non-distributional ones. By setting the upper bound to 1 and the lower bound
to 0, our learned critic naturally reflects theprogressof the task, as shown in Fig. 3.
3 Training Recipe
Human demonstrations are suboptimal and noisy. In the context of long-horizon dexterous high-precision
manipulation, human demonstrators tend to hesitate, make mistakes, and try to finish the task with inconsistent
behaviors. In addition, inference-time optimizations, such as whole-body receding horizon control and temporal
ensembling [14, 59], introduce further mismatch between training and deployment, which exacerbate the
negative effect of suboptimal demonstrations.
We introduce a reinforcement-augmented training pipeline to achieve dexterous and precise robotic manip-
ulation from human demonstrations. To prevent the policy from memorizing suboptimal behaviors during
supervised learning, we learn a task progress model using offline RL and use it to filter out detrimental data
(Sec. 3.1). We then augment the demonstrations to improve the robustness of the offline policy based on the
symmetry in bimanual manipulation (Sec. 3.2). Finally, we perform online reinforcement learning, allowing
the model to learn from trial-and-error in a closed loop, which mitigates the mismatch between training and
deployment and boosts its overall performance (Sec. 3.3).
3.1 Data Filtering with a Learned Task Progress Evaluator
For high-precision manipulation with deformable objects, such as shoe lacing, collecting perfect demonstrations
is extremely difficult. Even the trajectories collected by experienced teleoperators contain suboptimal fragments:
erroneous attempts, hesitations, etc. Directly imitating all the data would unnecessarily introduce noisy
multi-modal actions to the training and lead to a policy with suboptimal performance. However, labeling
the suboptimal fragments is non-trivial and might introduce even more subjective and noisy human priors.
To identify and filter out suboptimal actions, we propose to learn a task progress model using offline RL.
Specifically, we train the critic using TD3+BC [17]. We adopt a sparse reward defined as
r(ot, l,st,a t) =
(
γT−t I(τ), t > T−k,
0, t≤T−k, (1)
where I(·)is an indicator function to evaluate whether a trajectoryτ is successful or not,T is the length of the
trajectory, andγ means the discount factor. Since most of the collected trajectories end in success, we annotate
the retry keyframes in each demonstration and create more failed trajectories in hindsight [1]. Suppose
frames mi, 0 ≤i < Mare marked as retry keyframes in a successful trajectoryτ0:T , we can augmentM failed
trajectories τ0:mi , 0 ≤i < Min addition to the original successful one. With temporal difference learning
over both successful and failed data, the criticQϕ could function as a robust task progress evaluator. After
obtaining a task progress model, we evaluateQϕ and compute its mean value of the categorical distribution
as progressρfor all the transitions in the dataset,
ρt :=mean(Q ϕ(ot, l,st,a t)).(2)
An example of the predicted progress is shown in Fig. 3. We can observe a sudden drop in the progress when
the teleoperator makes a mistake. We define a sample(ot, l,st, at)at timestep t as suboptimal if there is a
value drop greater than a certain thresholdδ in the sequenceρt:t+k, and exclude all the suboptimal ones from
the dataset for policy learning. We can then trainπθ simply with behavior cloning using the filtered dataset
of higher quality.
3.2 Imitation Learning with Data Augmentation
During the offline training stage, we apply a simple yet effectivemorphological symmetry augmentation
paradigm, which further boosts the policy performance. The augmentation paradigm leverages the morpho-
logical symmetry in our bimanual task settings. For image observationsot, we flip all the images horizontally,
4
shoelace dr opped due to a 
shallow gr asp
shoelace slipped out of the ey elet
s h o e l a c e  r e g r a s p e d  s u c c e s s f u l l y
gr asping point ad justment on the shoe
successful thr eading s h o e l a c e  f u l l y  p u l l e d  o u t
impr ecise handov er
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 5 10 15 20
time(s) GR-RL Regr ession
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 5 10 15 20 25
time(s) GR-RL Regr ession
1.0
0.5
0.0
0 5 10 15 20 25
time(s) GR-RL Regr ession
shoelace slipped out of the ey elet
(a)  GR-RL v alue decr eases when the shoelace misses the e y elet and incr eases during pr ecise thr eading.
(b)  GR-RL v alue captur es multiple failed attempts during shoelace hando v er.
( c )   G R - R L  v a l u e  i s  a w a r e  o f  t h e  l o n g - t e r m  p o s i t i v e  e f f e c t  o f  r e l e a s i n g  t h e  s h o e l a c e  t o  a d j u s t  t h e  g r a s p i n g  p o s e .
Figure 3Examples of learned task progress.
5
then swap the images from the left wrist with those from the right wrist. All transformations in proprioception
statess t and actionsa t are converted via mirror symmetry in the world frame, and then transformed back to
local wrist frames. We also flip the spatial description in the language instructions accordingly, e.g., changing
“the hole on the left” to “the hole on the right”. Empirically, the symmetry data augmentation can effectively
enhance the performance of the policy.
3.3 Online Steering for Policy Deployment Alignment
System-level postprocessing is commonly applied to ensure smooth robot motions when deploying chunking
policies, such as temporal ensembling and receding horizon control [14, 59]. However, these optimization tricks
cause a mismatch between training and deployment: what the policy has seen during training (raw actions) is
different from the ones actually being executed during deployment (optimized actions). In the context of
dexterous and precise manipulation, the mismatch becomes non-negligible. To adapt to the discrepancy, we
find it crucial for the model to explore and improve itself via closed-loop online interactions withaligned
actions.
Performing online RL in long-horizon, precise manipulation tasks remains non-trivial, especially in exploration.
Since the task requires millimeter precision to complete, adding noise to wrist poses or joint positions hardly
leads to success. We instead perform structured exploration in a latent space and steer the trained flow
policy [54]. Specifically, we add anoise predictorπθ′ after the shared VLM backbone to predict the initial
noise ϵt for the action DiT. The number of trainable parameters inπθ′ is 51.5M. To avoid generating arbitrary
actions from noise out of the offline training distribution, we penalize the noise predictor when its output
diverges from the original normal distribution beyond a certain thresholdβ. Following [54], we also distill aQ
function over noise spaceQϕ′ (ot, l,st, ϵt)to avoid back-propagating through the flow model during policy
optimization. The critic in the original action spaceQϕ(ot, l,st, at)is trained via standard TD3. The online
training objectives for the noise transformer and the critic in noise space are as follows:
L(πθ′ ) =E(ot,l,st)∼D

−Qϕ′ (ot, l,st, ϵt) +cmax( 1
2∥ϵt∥2 −β,0)

, ϵt ∼π θ′ (ot, l,st),(3)
L(Qϕ′ ) =cross_entropy(Q ϕ′ (ot, l,st, ϵt), Qϕ(ot, l,st, πθ(ot, l,st|ϵt))), ϵt ∼
(
N(0,1)w.p.0.5,
πθ′ (ot, l,st)otherwise. (4)
Different from the original implementation [54], to ensure a good coverage on the noise space when distilling
Qϕ′ , we sample the input noise from the original normal distribution with 0.5 probability (w.p.0.5), and from
the noise predictor otherwise.
For sample-efficient offline to online adaptation, we maintain an off-policy buffer and an on-policy buffer, and
sample batches from them evenly. Before training starts, we warm up the off-policy buffer with online rollouts
of offline-trained checkpoints, similar to Warm-start RL [60]. We intentionally choose not to mix teleoperated
trajectories into the buffer to prevent the policy from training on mismatched dynamics. The on-policy buffer
only stores trajectories generated from the two most recent checkpoints, and the stale data is pushed into the
off-policy buffer.
4 Robot & System
The robot we utilize to verify GR-RL isByteMini-v2, as illustrated in Fig.4. ByteMini-v2 is a wheeled mobile
manipulation robot equipped with 7-DoF dual robotic arms, featuring a unique wrist spherical joint design [53].
The operational dexterity, stability, consistency, and usability of ByteMini-v1 robots have been fully validated
in the work of GR-3 [12]. Meanwhile, drawing on the limitations identified during ByteMini-v1 usage in GR-3,
we have implemented the following three key design optimizations on ByteMini-v2 robots.
Higher Load for ManipulationThe maximum load ability for the 7-DoF arm is limited by the maximum output
torque of the elbow actuator. We update the elbow actuator from peak output torque 17Nm to 35Nm. As a
result, the peak load of 7-DoF arms on ByteMini-v2 robots is increased from 1.4kg to 3.15kg, which will
significantly expand the robot’s operational capabilities.
6
Head Camer a 
IMX 307
Head Camer a 
RGB-D D457
Hand Camer a 
RGB-D D405
3D LiDAR 
Livox Mid 360
W r i s t  S p h e r e  
J o i n t
2-DoF Head
7-DoF Arm
1-DoF 
Gripper
1-DoF Lift 
Mechanism
3-DoF Omni 
Mobile Platform
Portable 
Monitor
Wifi 
Antenna
4.08kWh 
Battery
Dell NUC 
T3280 A2000
Figure 4 The ByteMini-v2 Robot.We show the robot specifications in terms of sensors, DoFs and electronic devices.
Enhanced Mobility in Confined SpacesThe projected area of the ByteMini-v1 chassis is 500mm x 720mm.
And now for improving the mobility in confined spaces, the projected area of ByteMini-v2 robot is reduced to
450mm x 650mm respectively. Meanwhile, the design of the servo steering wheels on the mobile platform
has also been optimized accordingly, enabling the synchronous adjustment of the steering wheels’ motion in
both yaw and pitch directions [56] and thereby enhancing the robot’s rapid direction-changing capability in
confined spaces.
Higher Polished Robot Design and Enhanced UsabilityAs shown in Fig.4, the ByteMini-v2 robot has been
designed with enhanced refinement, featuring an ID and proper encapsulation of exposed electrical wiring
harnesses. The position of the portable monitor has been adjusted from the robots’ chassis to the shoulder, in
order to achieve a better user experience.
5 Experiments
Task DescriptionWe present GR-RL in a shoe lacing task, a challenging scenario featuring long-horizon,
dexterous and precise manipulation. The observations are composed of three views of RGB images, proprio-
ception states, and language instructions. In model inference, we incorporate a trajectory optimization module
that imposes constraints on jerk and temporal continuity to refine the predicted action chunks. During RL
training, we adopt a binary sparse reward setting, meaning that a positive reward of 1 is obtained only when
the shoelace is threaded through the correct eyelet and put down on the table completely.
Main ResultsWe report the effect of our multi-stage training recipe in Fig. 5. Our base model GR-3, trained
with behavior cloning over all the human teleoperated data, achieves a success rate of 45.7%. After filtering the
data with our learned task progress model, the success rate is boosted to 61.6%. It highlights the importance
of the data cleaning mechanism when learning precise and long-horizon manipulation. With symmetry data
augmentation, the success rate of a filtered behavior cloning policy is further increased to 72.7%.
The “Filtered BC + Aug.” model serves as the starting point of online steering RL. To better align the
offline-trained critic to the distribution of model rollout, we collect 673 trajectories generated by the offline
model, then freeze the VLM backbone and continue to train the critic headsQϕ, Qϕ′ using these data. These
rollout trajectories are also populated into the off-policy replay buffer in online RL to stabilize training. We
then tune both the noise predictorπθ′ and the two critic heads for 50 optimization steps once we gather 12
new episodes online. The moving average of the success rate over a window size of 24 is shown as the curve
on the right side of Fig. 5, and the binary success signals for all online episodes are represented as dots. In
the first few iterations, the success rate decreases due to the distribution shift from offline to online RL. Later,
7
0.457
0.616
0.727
0.833
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Success Rate
GR-3
Filter ed BC
Filter ed BC+Aug
GR-RL
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175
Av er age success r ate
Episodes
episode r ewar d smoothed success r ate
Figure 5Left: the success rate of our multi-stage training recipe. Data filtering, mirror augmentation, and online
tuning all contribute to the final performance.Right: the binary success signal per episode (dots) and the moving
average of success rate (curve) during online finetuning. The performance increases rapidly after an offline-to-online
adaptation phase.
the success rate rapidly recovers and grows beyond the offline performance to over 90%. The checkpoint at
500 online training steps is used for evaluation, and achieves a success rate of 83.3%.
To better understand the failure modes for different models in this long-horizon task, we evaluate whether the
models succeed at several critical stages, including picking up the correct shoelace, threading the shoelace into
the correct eyelet, handing it over to another gripper, and pulling the shoelace tight. The detailed success
rate is illustrated in Fig. 6. The colored area denotes the success rate for completing each stage. The hatched
area represents the decrease in the success rate compared to the previous stage. Data filtering and online RL
can largely reduce the failure during threading. Data augmentation improves the model performance in all
stages, although with a smaller magnitude.
Ablation on the Progress EvaluatorWe validate the effectiveness of the RL-based progress evaluator by
comparing it with a regression variant. The regression baseline is trained by directly regressing the temporal
progress t
T of each statest in successful trajectories. As shown in Fig. 3, the regression-based predictor tends
to overly smooth the progress prediction. It makes reasonable predictions in normal cases but is less sensitive
to subtle failure (oftentimes only millimeters from success), such as failing to pull out the shoelace or imprecise
insertion. Also, the regression-based predictor is not good at capturing transitions with long-term effects.
There is a significant value jump in the predictions of GR-RL when the robot intentionally puts down the
shoelace to adjust the grasping pose, but the regression-based prediction is almost flat during the adjustment.
We also train a non-distributional critic with the same TD3+BC algorithm to compare with our distributional
critic. The models are evaluated over a high-quality successful trajectory, as illustrated in Fig. 7. Due to
the long horizon and binary sparse reward in our setting, the non-distributional critic suffers from severe
over-estimation, especially in earlier parts of trajectories where the reward supervision signal is weak. The
value prediction of our distributional critic falls in a predefined range, thus converging to a reasonable scale
more robustly and demonstrating better alignment with the true temporal order.
Visualization of the Learned BehaviorsGR-RL demonstrates robust behaviors in various cases. It can handle
shoes with different colors and sizes, as shown in Fig. 8. The model automatically retries when the shoelace
accidentally drops down (Fig. 8b) or when the shoelace misses the eyelet (Fig. 8c). The model can actively
manipulate the scene to make the task easier to solve. In Fig. 8d, the initial grasping point is far from the tip
of the shoelace. The model decides to drop the shoelace on top of the deformable shoe and regrasp closer to
the tip before threading. In Fig. 8e, the model first reorients the shoe from the left side to straighten it, then
starts threading. Similarly, for a shoe initially positioned on the far side of the table (Fig. 8f), the robot can
pull it near, adjust the position of the shoelace, and then complete the task. In cases where the two ends of
8
GR-3
Filter ed BC
Filter ed BC+Aug.
GR-RL
Start
Pick up the 
shoelace
Thr ead into 
the ey elet
Handov er 
success
Pull out the 
shoelace
0.906
0.928
0.962
0.979
0.457
0.616
0.727
0.833
0.464
0.638
0.742
0.833
0.587
0.710
0.765
0.896
Figure 6Detailed success rates of different models for completing intermediate stages. The height of each hatched
area denotes the decrease in success rate from the previous stage to the current stage.
2
0
0 5 10 15 20 25
time(s) GR-RL Regr ession
Figure 7Comparison of progress prediction by distributional vs. non-distributional critics. Non-distributional critics
are unbounded in the output range, and fail to reflect the positive progress in a successful trajectory.
the shoelace are crossed, and the end that should be grasped is underneath (Fig. 8g), the model can identify
the correct one and pull it out.
6 Related Work
Generalist Robotic Foundation PolicyBuilding generalist robotic foundation manipulation policies is a long-
standing challenge for robotics research and applications [4, 6–10, 25, 27, 31, 32, 45, 50, 52]. Recent advances
in building vision-language-action (VLA) models advocate adapting the vision-language models (VLMs)
pretrained with web-scale data to robotic actions by adding the action modality [8, 15, 25, 27, 29, 36, 42–
44,52,55]. The core idea is to leverage large-scale real-world robot trajectories collected by human teleoperators
and generalize to potentially novel scenes and tasks. GR-RL sits upon the prior success of GR-3 [12], a
generalist policy co-trained with web-scale data and human demonstrations. GR-RL further improves GR-3 by
filtering high-quality data, augmenting actions, and online real-world RL, enabling it to perform long-horizon
9
(a)Thread shoelace for a shoe with a different color.
(b)Regrasp the shoelace when it drops.
(c)Re-attempt when the shoelace is not threaded precisely through the eyelet.
(d)Adjust the grasp pose intentionally on the surface of the shoe.
(e)Reorient the shoe before threading.
(f)Adjust the positions of the shoe and the shoelace before threading.
(g)Pull out the shoelace underneath another one from the crossed laces.
Figure 8Robust behavior of GR-RL in various cases.
10
dexterous and precise manipulation.
Real-World Reinforcement LearningA central limitation of pure imitation learning is its susceptibility to
compounding errors and its inability to exceed the performance of demonstrations. To address these issues, a
significant body of work explores online data collection and real-world reinforcement learning (RL) to improve
manipulation robustness beyond supervised training [2, 26, 28, 30, 38–40, 48, 49]. In the context of VLAs,
some recent works aim to perform policy improvement via on-policy RL [13, 34, 37, 46, 58] in simulation.
However, transferring their success to real-world scenarios remains difficult because real-world interactions are
sample inefficient and noisy. Another line of work learns world models and performs on-policy RL interacting
with the learned world model [18–22, 41, 57, 61]. World models alleviate the issue for real-robot interaction,
but introduce further issues given inaccurate visual predictions. GR-RL follows [38, 39, 48] and focuses on
real-world off-policy RL. This allows us to efficiently utilize past trajectories and improve the sample efficiency.
Treating the noisy real-world reward as a distribution, we show that distributional critics significantly improve
the robustness compared with standard regression-based critic models. Concurrent to our work,π∗
0.6 presents
a real-world RL pipeline for high-precision manipulation [24]. Similar toπ∗
0.6, we both adopt distributional
critics that learn the progress of the task. However, instead of performing advantage-conditioned denoising,
we directly perform filtered behavior cloning and also observe a strong performance boost. Given the stronger
base offline policy, it helps reduce the search space during online exploration. We hope GR-RL reveals certain
insights to the community on building capable specialist agents from generalist policies and helps to push the
boundaries of deployable robotics research.
7 Limitations & Conclusions
LimitationsDespite the strong performance of GR-RL in long-horizon high-precision dexterous tasks, it still
has clear limitations. One of the major issues of our current pipeline is the behavior-drifting problem. Given
a sparse and noisy reward, our policy behavior could be unstable during online RL. This is possibly due
to the limited capacity of the lightweight noise predictor, or the challenging credit assignment issue in the
large latent action space. Furthermore, distilling the improved policy into the base VLA could be a potential
direction for obtaining both capable and general manipulation policies. We leave these issues for future study.
ConclusionWe introduce GR-RL, a robotic learning framework for building specialist VLA policies for long-
horizon dexterous and precise manipulation. The key insight of GR-RL is that the mismatch between data
collection and policy inference needs online alignment. GR-RL learns an RL-based evaluator by treating the
critic value learned from sparse reward as task progress prediction, and uses it to filter high-quality transitions
to train a robust base policy. During this process, we also introduce a simple yet effective morphological
symmetry augmentation method to improve the overall performance. Last, we perform online RL that aligns
the rollout behavior with our training signals. To the best of our knowledge, GR-RL is the first learning-based
policy capable of lacing up shoes. We hope GR-RL can be a small step towards capable real-world specialist
robot policies.
11
References
[1] Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Josh
Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors,Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.
[2] Lars Ankile, Zhenyu Jiang, Rocky Duan, Guanya Shi, Pieter Abbeel, and Anusha Nagabandi. Residual off-policy
rl for finetuning behavior cloning policies.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.19301, 2025.
[3] Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wenbin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang,
Jun Tang, et al. Qwen2.5-vl technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923, 2025.
[4] Jose Barreiros, Andrew Beaulieu, Aditya Bhat, Rick Cory, Eric Cousineau, Hongkai Dai, Ching-Hsin Fang,
Kunimatsu Hashimoto, Muhammad Zubair Irshad, Masha Itkina, et al. A careful examination of large behavior
models for multitask dexterous manipulation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05331, 2025.
[5] Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement learning. In
International conference on machine learning, pages 449–458. PMLR, 2017.
[6] Homanga Bharadhwaj, Jay Vakil, Mohit Sharma, Abhinav Gupta, Shubham Tulsiani, and Vikash Kumar.
Roboagent: Generalization and efficiency in robot manipulation via semantic augmentations and action chunking.
In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 4788–4795. IEEE, 2024.
[7] Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox,
Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.14734, 2025.
[8] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy
Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, et al.π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
[9] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Joseph Dabis, Chelsea Finn, Keerthana
Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, et al. Rt-1: Robotics transformer for real-world
control at scale.arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.06817, 2022.
[10] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding,
Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, et al. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge
to robotic control.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818, 2023.
[11] Chi-Lam Cheang, Guangzeng Chen, Ya Jing, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao Liu, Hongtao Wu, Jiafeng
Xu, Yichu Yang, et al. Gr-2: A generative video-language-action model with web-scale knowledge for robot
manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06158, 2024.
[12] Chilam Cheang, Sijin Chen, Zhongren Cui, Yingdong Hu, Liqun Huang, Tao Kong, Hang Li, Yifeng Li, Yuxiao
Liu, Xiao Ma, et al. Gr-3 technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15493, 2025.
[13] Kang Chen, Zhihao Liu, Tonghe Zhang, Zhen Guo, Si Xu, Hao Lin, Hongzhi Zang, Quanlu Zhang, Zhaofei
Yu, Guoliang Fan, et al. Online rl fine-tuning for flow-based vision-language-action models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.25889, 2025.
[14] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran
Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion.The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 2024.
[15] Ria Doshi, Homer Walke, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, and Sergey Levine. Scaling cross-embodied learning: One
policy for manipulation, navigation, locomotion and aviation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11812, 2024.
[16] Jesse Farebrother, Jordi Orbay, Quan Vuong, Adrien Ali Taïga, Yevgen Chebotar, Ted Xiao, Alex Irpan, Sergey
Levine, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aleksandra Faust, et al. Stop regressing: Training value functions via classification
for scalable deep rl.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03950, 2024.
[17] Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning.Advancesin
neural information processing systems, 34:20132–20145, 2021.
12
[18] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors
by latent imagination.arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.
[19] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete world
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.
[20] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104, 2023.
[21] Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive control.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.04955, 2022.
[22] Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous control.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16828, 2023.
[23] Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan, Bilal
Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement learning. In
Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
[24] Physical Intelligence, Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ashwin Balakrishna, Kevin Black, Ken Conley, Grace Connors,
James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Jared DiCarlo, Danny Driess, Michael Equi, Adnan Esmail, Yunhao Fang,
Chelsea Finn, Catherine Glossop, Thomas Godden, Ivan Goryachev, Lachy Groom, Hunter Hancock, Karol
Hausman, Gashon Hussein, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Rowan Jen, Tim Jones, Ben Katz, Liyiming Ke,
Chandra Kuchi, Marinda Lamb, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Yao Lu, Vishnu Mano, Mohith
Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Charvi Sharma, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias
Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, Will Stoeckle, Alex Swerdlow, James Tanner, Marcel Torne, Quan Vuong, Anna
Walling, Haohuan Wang, Blake Williams, Sukwon Yoo, Lili Yu, Ury Zhilinsky, and Zhiyuan Zhou.π∗0.6: a vla
that learns from experience.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14759, 2025.
[25] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan
Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al.π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world
generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
[26] Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre Quillen, Ethan
Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-based
robotic manipulation. InConference on robot learning, pages 651–673. PMLR, 2018.
[27] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov,
Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024.
[28] Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(39):1–40, 2016.
[29] Qixiu Li, Yaobo Liang, Zeyu Wang, Lin Luo, Xi Chen, Mozheng Liao, Fangyun Wei, Yu Deng, Sicheng Xu,
Yizhong Zhang, et al. Cogact: A foundational vision-language-action model for synergizing cognition and action
in robotic manipulation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19650, 2024.
[30] Qiyang Li, Zhiyuan Zhou, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with action chunking.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.07969, 2025.
[31] Xinghang Li, Minghuan Liu, Hanbo Zhang, Cunjun Yu, Jie Xu, Hongtao Wu, Chilam Cheang, Ya Jing, Weinan
Zhang, Huaping Liu, et al. Vision-language foundation models as effective robot imitators. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.01378, 2023.
[32] Xinghang Li, Peiyan Li, Minghuan Liu, Dong Wang, Jirong Liu, Bingyi Kang, Xiao Ma, Tao Kong, Hanbo Zhang,
and Huaping Liu. Towards generalist robot policies: What matters in building vision-language-action models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14058, 2024.
[33] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le. Flow matching for generative
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747, 2022.
[34] Jijia Liu, Feng Gao, Bingwen Wei, Xinlei Chen, Qingmin Liao, Yi Wu, Chao Yu, and Yu Wang. What can rl
bring to vla generalization? an empirical study.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.19789, 2025.
13
[35] Qiang Liu. Rectified flow: A marginal preserving approach to optimal transport.arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14577,
2022.
[36] Songming Liu, Lingxuan Wu, Bangguo Li, Hengkai Tan, Huayu Chen, Zhengyi Wang, Ke Xu, Hang Su, and Jun
Zhu. Rdt-1b: a diffusion foundation model for bimanual manipulation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07864, 2024.
[37] Guanxing Lu, Wenkai Guo, Chubin Zhang, Yuheng Zhou, Haonan Jiang, Zifeng Gao, Yansong Tang, and Ziwei
Wang. Vla-rl: Towards masterful and general robotic manipulation with scalable reinforcement learning.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.18719, 2025.
[38] Jianlan Luo, Zheyuan Hu, Charles Xu, You Liang Tan, Jacob Berg, Archit Sharma, Stefan Schaal, Chelsea Finn,
Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Serl: A software suite for sample-efficient robotic reinforcement learning. In
2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 16961–16969. IEEE, 2024.
[39] Jianlan Luo, Charles Xu, Jeffrey Wu, and Sergey Levine. Precise and dexterous robotic manipulation via
human-in-the-loop reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21845, 2024.
[40] Lei Lv, Yunfei Li, Yu Luo, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Jiafeng Xu, and Xiao Ma. Flow-based policy for online
reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12811, 2025.
[41] Xiao Ma, Siwei Chen, David Hsu, and Wee Sun Lee. Contrastive variational reinforcement learning for complex
observations. InConference on robot learning, pages 959–972. PMLR, 2021.
[42] Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn
Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, et al. Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets
and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collaboration 0. In2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 6892–6903. IEEE, 2024.
[43] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea
Finn, and Sergey Levine. Fast: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.09747, 2025.
[44] Delin Qu, Haoming Song, Qizhi Chen, Yuanqi Yao, Xinyi Ye, Yan Ding, Zhigang Wang, JiaYuan Gu, Bin Zhao,
Dong Wang, et al. Spatialvla: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.15830, 2025.
[45] Moritz Reuss, Ömer Erdinç Yağmurlu, Fabian Wenzel, and Rudolf Lioutikov. Multimodal diffusion transformer:
Learning versatile behavior from multimodal goals.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05996, 2024.
[46] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[47] Younggyo Seo and Pieter Abbeel. Coarse-to-fine q-network with action sequence for data-efficient robot learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12155, 2024.
[48] Younggyo Seo, Jafar Uruç, and Stephen James. Continuous control with coarse-to-fine reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07787, 2024.
[49] Archit Sharma, Ahmed M Ahmed, Rehaan Ahmad, and Chelsea Finn. Self-improving robots: End-to-end
autonomous visuomotor reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01488, 2023.
[50] Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma, Adil Zouitine, Michel
Aractingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andres Marafioti, et al. Smolvla: A vision-language-action model for
affordable and efficient robotics.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844, 2025.
[51] Gemini Robotics Team, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas,
Travis Armstrong, Ashwin Balakrishna, Robert Baruch, Maria Bauza, Michiel Blokzijl, et al. Gemini robotics:
Bringing ai into the physical world.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20020, 2025.
[52] Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna,
Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, et al. Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy.arXiv preprintarXiv:2405.12213,
2024.
[53] Jiawen Tian, Liqun Huang, Zhongren Cui, Jingchao Qiao, Jiafeng Xu, Xiao Ma, and Zeyu Ren. Bytewrist:
A parallel robotic wrist enabling flexible and anthropomorphic motion for confined spaces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.18084, 2025.
14
[54] Andrew Wagenmaker, Mitsuhiko Nakamoto, Yunchu Zhang, Seohong Park, Waleed Yagoub, Anusha Nagabandi,
Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Steering your diffusion policy with latent space reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15799, 2025.
[55] Lirui Wang, Xinlei Chen, Jialiang Zhao, and Kaiming He. Scaling proprioceptive-visual learning with heterogeneous
pre-trained transformers. Advancesin neural information processing systems, 37:124420–124450, 2024.
[56] Jimmy Wu, Rika Antonova, Adam Kan, Marion Lepert, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Jeannette Bohg, Szymon
Rusinkiewicz, and Thomas Funkhouser. Tidybot: Personalized robot assistance with large language models.
Autonomous Robots, 47(8):1087–1102, 2023.
[57] Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Daydreamer: World models
for physical robot learning. InConference on robot learning, pages 2226–2240. PMLR, 2023.
[58] Wenke Xia, Yichu Yang, Hongtao Wu, Xiao Ma, Tao Kong, and Di Hu. Robotic policy learning via human-assisted
action preference optimization.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07127, 2025.
[59] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation
with low-cost hardware.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705, 2023.
[60] Zhiyuan Zhou, Andy Peng, Qiyang Li, Sergey Levine, and Aviral Kumar. Efficient online reinforcement learning
fine-tuning need not retain offline data.arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.07762, 2024.
[61] Fangqi Zhu, Zhengyang Yan, Zicong Hong, Quanxin Shou, Xiao Ma, and Song Guo. Wmpo: World model-based
policy optimization for vision-language-action models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.09515, 2025.
15
Contributions and Acknowledgments
Authors are listed in alphabetical order.
Core ContributorsYunfei Li, Xiao Ma, Jiafeng Xu
ContributorsYu Cui, Zhongren Cui, Zhigang Han, Liqun Huang, Tao Kong, Yuxiao Liu, Hao Niu, Wanli
Peng, Jingchao Qiao, Zeyu Ren, Haixin Shi, Zhi Su, Jiawen Tian, Yuyang Xiao, Shenyu Zhang, Liwei Zheng
SupervisorsHang Li, Yonghui Wu
AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Yichu Yang for the insightful discussion on morphological mirror
augmentation. We thank Chilam Cheang, Jinming Guo, Zetian Li, Xin Zhao, Mingyang Wang, Zhiguo Hao,
Tianxiang Gong, Yang Zhao, Shuzhai Guo, Ziye Liu and all the data annotators for their help on data curation.
We thank Degong Yang and Yang Liu for their help on hardware system development and maintenance.
16