Highlights
RE-LLM: Integrating Large Language Models into Renewable En-
ergy Systems
Ali Forootani*, Mohammad Sadr, Danial Esmaeili Aliabadi, Daniela Thrän
•RE-LLM integrates optimization, ML surrogates, and LLMs for energy
planning.
•Machine learning surrogates accelerate scenario analysis while retaining
fidelity.
•LLM-generated narratives improve comprehension beyond charts and
tables.
•Frameworkenhancestransparencyandaccessibilityforpolicyandstake-
holders.
•Demonstrated on Germany’s land-based GHG mitigation strategies
(2020–2050).
arXiv:2512.01392v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
RE-LLM: Integrating Large Language Models into
Renewable Energy Systems
Ali Forootani*a, Mohammad Sadra, Danial Esmaeili Aliabadia, Daniela
Thräna,b,c
aHelmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Permoserstraße 15, 04318
Leipzig, Germany
bDBFZ Deutsches Biomasseforschungszentrum gGmbH, Torgauer Strasse 116, 04347
Leipzig, Germany
cUniversity Leipzig, Institute for Infrastructure and Resources Management,
Grimmaische Str. 12, 04109 Leipzig, Germany
Abstract
Energy system models are increasingly employed to guide long-term planning
in multi-sectoral environments where decisions span electricity, heat, trans-
port, land use, and industry. While these models provide rigorous quantita-
tive insights, their outputs are often highly technical, making them difficult
to interpret for non-expert stakeholders such as policymakers, planners, and
the public. This communication gap limits the accessibility and practical
impact of scenario-based modeling, particularly as energy transitions grow
more complex with rising shares of renewables, sectoral integration, and deep
uncertainties.
To address this challenge, we propose the Renewable Energy Large Lan-
guage Model (RE-LLM), a hybrid framework that integrates Large Language
Models(LLMs)directlyintotheenergysystemmodelingworkflow.RE-LLMcom-
bines three core elements: (i) optimization-based scenario exploration, (ii)
machine learning surrogates that accelerate computationally intensive simu-
lations, and (iii)LLM-powered natural language generation that translates
complex results into clear, stakeholder-oriented explanations. This inte-
grated design not only reduces computational burden but also enhances inter-
∗Ali Forootani
Email addresses:ali.forootani@ufz.de/aliforootani@ieee.org(Ali Forootani*),
mohammad.sadr@ufz.de(Mohammad Sadr),danial.esmaeili@ufz.de(Danial
Esmaeili Aliabadi),daniela.thraen@ufz.de(Daniela Thrän)
pretability, enabling real-time reasoning about trade-offs, sensitivities, and
policy implications.
The framework is adaptable across different optimization platforms and
energy system models, ensuring broad applicability beyond the case study
presented. By merging speed, rigor, and interpretability,RE-LLMadvances
a new paradigm of human-centric energy modeling. It enables interactive,
multilingual, and accessible engagement with future energy pathways, ulti-
mately bridging the final gap between data-driven analysis and actionable
decision-making for sustainable transitions.
Keywords:Renewable energy, Scenario modeling, Machine learning, Large
language models, Interpretability, Optimization, Stakeholder analysis
1. Introduction
Energy system models have become indispensable decision-support tools
for strategic planning and policy design in the face of climate change, rising
energy demand, and the global pursuit of carbon neutrality. By casting long-
term investment and technology-deployment questions as large-scale opti-
mization problems—most commonly linear programming (LP), mixed-integer
linear programming (MILP), or dynamic programming (DP) Forootani et al.
[1]—these models identify cost-optimal or emissions-minimizing pathways
across interconnected enegry sectors such as electricity, heat, transport, and
other non-energy sectors Howells et al. [2], Bhattacharyya [3], Laveneziana
et al. [4], Dagoumas and Koltsaklis [5], Connolly et al. [6], Ringkjøb et al.
[7].
The smooth transition to low-carbon, renewables-dominated energy sys-
tems therefore relies on robust decision-making frameworks, such asTIMES
Loulou et al. [8],MESSAGEHuppmann et al. [9], andOSeMOSYSHowells et al.
[2]. These scenario-based models integrate detailed techno-economic inputs
with policy and demand uncertainties, solving cost-minimization or utility-
maximization problems to reveal cost-effective technology portfolios, invest-
ment schedules, and policy interventions at various spatiotemporal resolu-
tions and regions. Yet, as energy systems grow in complexity—due to in-
creasing penetration of variable renewables, sector coupling, and decentral-
ized generation—there is a rising demand formodular, multi-sectoral, and
high-resolution models. Tools such asGENeSYS-MODLöffler et al. [10], Barani
et al. [11],PyPSABrown et al. [12],BENOPTexMillinger et al. [13] andCalliope
2
Pfenninger and Pickering [14] have emerged to support these requirements
by offering open-source, flexible, and highly customizable modeling environ-
ments. These frameworks support scenario construction, multi-region trade
analysis, and sensitivity studies, often with transparent data structures and
scripting interfaces inPythonorGAMS.
Despite their analytical power, these complex (optimization or equilib-
rium) models tend to produce results in the form of large tabular datasets
and configuration files, which can be consumed by machines, but are not
easily interpretable by non-expert stakeholders Vaidyanathan [15]. This
has motivated the integration of scenario analysis tools that go beyond nu-
merical outputs, facilitating the exploration of counterfactuals, trade-offs,
and pathway comparisons. Scenario explorers such as IIASA’s Scenario Ex-
plorer Cointe [16], Huppmann et al. [17], IAMC’s databases Huppmann et al.
[17], andEn-ROADSRooney-Varga et al. [18] enable interactive exploration of
pre-computed trajectories under different assumptions.
1.1. Comparison of Energy System Optimization Frameworks
The literature on renewable energy system optimization can be broadly
categorized into the following themes:
(i)IntegratedAssessmentModels(IAMs): StudiesusingtoolssuchasMESSAGE-GLOBIOM
van Ruijven and Min [19], Rogelj et al. [20] andREMIND-MAgPIEcombine en-
ergy Klein et al. [21], land, and climate modules to assess global climate
targets. These models have been instrumental in producing scenarios for the
IPCCand informing global mitigation pathways.
(ii)NationalEnergyPlanning: Optimizationframeworkstailoredforcountry-
level planning (e.g.,UK TIMESLoulou et al. [22], McJeon et al. [23] ,ReEDS
Short et al. [24],GENeSYS-MOD GermanyLöffler et al. [25]) explore cost-
optimal decarbonization strategies while accounting for local resource po-
tentials, technology roadmaps, and policy constraints.
(iii)Multi-SectorCoupling: Recentworkemphasizessectoralintegration—linking
electricity with heating, transport, hydrogen, and industrial systems. For in-
stance,PyPSA-Eur-SecBrown et al. [26] models high-resolution cross-sectoral
energy systems for Europe using hourly dispatch and investment optimiza-
tion Brown et al. [27], Gøtske et al. [28], Unnewehr et al. [29], Glaum et al.
[30].
(iv) Scenario Uncertainty and Flexibility: Increasingly, scenario analysis in-
cludes probabilistic methods and stochastic programming to account for un-
certainty in inputs. Approaches such asrobust optimizationConejo and Wu
3
[31], Qiu et al. [32] andadaptive scenario treesLorca and Sun [33], Moret
et al. [34], Li and Grossmann [35], Kayacık et al. [36] are gaining traction to
deal with deep uncertainties in renewable integration and technology uptake.
(v) Tool Comparison and Benchmarking: Comparative studies, such as those
by theEuropean Climate Foundation (ECF)and theOpenmod initiative
Hilpert et al. [37], have highlighted methodological differences across tools
and their implications for policy outcomes Prina et al. [38], Pfenninger et al.
[39].
While these models offer quantitative rigor and technical transparency,
their interpretability and accessibility for broader stakeholders—such as pol-
icymakers, investors, or the public—remain limited. In Göpfert et al. [40] au-
thors introduced datasets designed to help researchers interpret quantitative
data. However, these datasets are tailored for expert users and are not easily
comprehensible for laypersons. This has prompted a growing body of work
focused on enhancing the communicability of model results throughvisualiza-
tion,interactive dashboards, and more recently, natural language generation
techniques powered by Large Language Models (LLMs). Table Appendix .1
shows the summary of notable energy-system optimization frameworks.
Despite their analytical rigor and proven utility for long-term planning,
traditional energy system optimization models can become prohibitively ex-
pensive when applied to fine-grained spatial resolutions, hourly temporal res-
olutions, or large scenario ensembles Pfenninger et al. [41], Ramsebner et al.
[42]. These computational limitations restrict their scalability and respon-
siveness—especially in interactive policy settings or exploratory modeling
under deep uncertainty. To overcome these bottlenecks, recent research has
increasingly adoptedmachine learning-based surrogate modelsas emulators
of complex energy system behavior. These surrogates—trained on a subset
of high-fidelity model outputs—enable rapid evaluation of scenario outcomes
while preserving key system dynamics Yao et al. [43], Grillone et al. [44]. As
a result, surrogate modeling plays a vital role in enabling real-time scenario
analysis, sensitivity exploration, and the democratization of energy system
insights.
Recent literature spans a wide spectrum of machine-learning techniques:
(i) Tree-based methods: Random-Forest (RF) surrogates have proved robust
for grid-related tasks such as low-voltage power-flow emulation Balduin et al.
[45] and for thermal-energy-storageCFDemulation whereRFs complement
neural networks in hybrid workflows Menear et al. [46].
(ii) Deep Neural Networks (DNNs): Fully connected, convolutional and recur-
4
rent architectures underpin building-energy calibration Herbinger et al. [47],
active-learning optimisation of building envelopes Bamdad et al. [48], and
multi-generation energy-system design with six conflicting objectives Gha-
fariasl et al. [49]. At the systems level, country-scaleEnergyPLANruns can
be emulated up to two orders of magnitude faster withDNNsurrogates Prina
et al. [50].
(iii) Hybrid and review studies: Ensemble or hybrid physics–MLschemes ac-
celerate national energy-economic models Bogensperger et al. [51]. Compre-
hensive reviews now synthesise progress for optimal-power-flow surrogates
Mohammadi et al. [52].
(iv) High-dimensional physics: Deep convolutional surrogates have been used
for rapid topology-driven heat-transfer design Keramati and Hamdullahpur
[53], while climate modellers employDNNs to emulate precipitation fields in
Earth-system models Weber et al. [54].
Collectively, these studies show that surrogate emulation—whether via
RFs, gradient-boosted trees, feed-forwardDNNs,CNNs,LSTMs, or hybrid archi-
tectures—can cut run-times by 90–99 % while maintaining prediction errors
below 5–10 % for most energy-system metrics, enabling broader uncertainty
analysis, policy exploration, and user-interactive scenario tools.
Whilesurrogatemodelingaddressesthecomputationalchallengesoflarge-
scale simulations, another growing barrier in energy system modeling lies in
the interpretability and accessibility of results for diverse stakeholders. Even
the most efficient surrogate models often produce outputs that are highly
technical and difficult for non-experts—such as policymakers, planners, or
the public—to interpret or act upon. To bridge this communication gap, re-
searchers are increasingly exploring the use ofLLMs to facilitate model trans-
parency Wasserkrug et al. [55], automate insight extraction, and support
interactive, user-centric engagement with complex datasets and optimization
outputs. Recent developments demonstrate howLLMs can serve as powerful
mediators between technical models and human decision-makers, ushering
in a new paradigm of interpretable, conversational modeling interfaces. The
rise ofLLMs has begun to reshape scientific workflows by automating litera-
ture insight, metadata parsing, and stakeholder-focused model communica-
tion. Recent initiatives demonstrate this paradigm shift through a suite of
domain-tailoredLLMapplications, several of which are summarized as follows.
(i) Energy Language Model (ELM): Developed byNREL,ELMintegratesLLMs
(e.g.,GPT-4) with energy data sources to enable chat-based querying of large
technical corpora. It uses retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to support
5
tasks such as legal ordinance extraction and research report summarization
with human-level accuracy, improving reproducibility and transparency in
energy studies Buster [56], Weers et al. [57].
(ii)AskGDRassistant: ExtendingELMprinciples,AskGDRis a domain-specific
virtual assistant for the Geothermal Data Repository (GDR). By combin-
ing metadata and documents withLLMcapabilities, it answers semantic re-
searcherqueries—ondatasetorigin, methodology, andapplicability—enhancing
data discoverability and utility Weers et al. [57].
(iii) Policy and siting automation: DemonstratingLLM-based extraction of re-
newableenergysitingordinancesfromzoningdocuments, achieving85%–90%
accuracy vs. manual curation—significantly reducing researcher effort and
improving maintainability of policy databases Buster [56], Buster et al. [58].
(iv) General frameworks: Broader efforts, likeNREL’s Language Model Inven-
tory, survey capabilities and offerings of both open- and closed-sourceLLMs,
presenting strategic insights into their utility for model communication and
domain-specific adoption Emami et al. [59].
These studies establishLLMs as powerful tools for automated model com-
municationinscience—bridgingthegapbetweentechnicalfindingsandstake-
holders through intelligent document parsing, Q & A interfaces, and policy-
focused knowledge extraction. Their emergence suggests promising avenues
for enhancing interpretability, accessibility, and democratization of scientific
outputs.
1.2. Contributions and Paper Roadmap
However, despite their analytical rigor, traditional energy system mod-
els often generate outputs in forms that are difficult for non-expert stake-
holders, such as policymakers, urban planners, and community organiza-
tions, to interpret or utilize effectively in decision-making contexts Pfen-
ninger et al. [41], Foucquier et al. [60]. As energy transitions become more
complex—driven by high shares of variable renewable energy, decentralized
infrastructures, and multi-sectoral coupling—there is a growing demand for
modeling frameworks that not only provide accurate projections but also of-
fer intuitive, interactive, and explainable outputs Bevis et al. [61], Fontes
et al. [62].
In response to this challenge, we introduceRE-LLM, a novel hybrid frame-
work designed to enhance the accessibility and interpretability of energy sys-
tem modeling through the integration ofLLMs within classical scenario anal-
ysis workflows.RE-LLMbuilds upon recent advances in natural language pro-
6
cessing and machine learning to couple traditional optimization tools (e.g.,
GAMS-basedmodels)withpost-processingmodulesforsurrogatemodelingand
automatedexplanationgeneration. Specifically, theframeworkintegrates: (i)
scenario-based optimization over techno-economic variables and policy con-
straints, (ii)machinelearningsurrogatestoreducecomputationalburdenand
enable real-time sensitivity analysis, and (iii)LLM-powered natural language
generation to translate complex model outputs into accessible explanations
tailored to diverse user groups.
This integration ofLLMs into the modeling pipeline marks a significant
step toward human-centric energy planning, where complex quantitative re-
sults are rendered transparent and actionable through conversationalAIin-
terfaces. By facilitating interactive, multi-lingual, and context-aware explo-
ration of energy futures,RE-LLMcontributes to bridging the gap between
technical modeling communities and broader stakeholder audiences—thus
advancing the co-design of sustainable energy strategies in line with global
climate objectives Bouckaert et al. [63], L’Heureux et al. [64].
This paper makes three main contributions:
1. Framework design: We introduceRE-LLM, a hybrid modeling workflow
that integrates optimization-based scenario analysis, machine learn-
ing surrogates, andLLM-powered explanation in a unified, user-facing
pipeline. This design explicitly targets both computational efficiency
and interpretability, bridging quantitative rigor with stakeholder acces-
sibility.
2. Demonstration of scalability: We applyRE-LLMin a large-scale en-
ergy planning context, showing that machine learning surrogates can
accelerate scenario exploration by more than an order of magnitude
while maintaining high fidelity to detailed optimization results. This
illustrates the framework’s capacity to support rapid, interactive ex-
ploration of uncertain futures.
3. Stakeholder validation: Through a structured user study with energy
policy analysts, we demonstrate thatLLM-generated narratives signif-
icantly improve comprehension of complex scenarios compared with
traditional numerical or chart-based reporting. This highlights the po-
tential of natural language explanations to democratize insights from
energy system modeling.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides an
overview of energy system modeling and its role in long-term planning. Sec-
7
tion 4 introduces theRE-LLMframework, detailing the integration of scenario-
based optimization, surrogate modeling, andLLM-driven interpretation. Sec-
tion 5 presents the simulation results for the case study, demonstrating the
framework’s ability to enhance both computational efficiency and stakeholder
interpretability. Finally, Section6concludeswithasummaryofcontributions
and outlines directions for future research.
By merging speed, rigor, and interpretability,RE-LLMaspires to make
sophisticated energy modelling as accessible as a conversation—bridging the
final mile between data-driven insight and real-world action.
2. Energy System Model Overview
Energy System Optimization Models (ESOMs) are typically formulated as
constrained optimization problems, where the goal is to minimize a cost
functionf(x)subject to a set of feasibility constraintsgj(x)≥0for allj∈J.
Here,x∈R n is the vector of decision variables representing technology
investments, land-use allocations, or energy system flows.
min
x
f(x),(1)
s.t.g j(x)≥0,∀j∈J,(2)
whilethisgeneralformulationcanrepresentnonlinearoptimizationproblems,
mostESOMs adopt anLPstructure to ensure tractability and scalability. In the
linear case, the objective and constraints are linear functions of the decision
vectorx. Specifically:
min
x
c⊤x,(3)
s.t.Ax≥b,(4)
here,c∈R n is the cost coefficient vector,A∈Rm×n is the constraint matrix,
andb∈R m encodes lower bounds for the constraints. This structure allows
ESOMs to scale to national or continental-level planning horizons, spanning
hundreds of technologies and regions.
TheLPformulation underpins many established frameworks, including
TIMESLoulou et al. [8],MESSAGEHuppmann et al. [9], andBENOPTexMillinger
et al. [13], and enables fast solution times using state-of-the-art solvers like
CPLEXorGurobi.
8
2.1. Case Study: Net-zero emissions
BENOPTex(theBioENergy OPTimisationmodel)isahigh-resolution, linear-
programming tool that determines the cost-optimal and/or greenhouse-gas-
optimal allocation of biomass, hydrogen and excess renewable electricity
across the power, heat and transport sectors Millinger et al. [13]. Written in
MATLABandGAMS, it follows every pathway from feedstock to end-use service,
comparing more than 30 conversion technologies, over 20 biomass types and
a full suite of power-to-X options, all the way down to 15-minute time-steps
on the electricity side Millinger et al. [13]. This granularity enables rapid
Pareto-front, Monte-Carlo sensitivity and policy-scenario analyses that large
integrated-assessment or power-system models typically cannot perform in
practical run-times. Originally developed for German energy-transition stud-
ies, theframeworkiscountry-agnosticandhasalreadyinformedfederalpolicy
on biofuels, heating and electrofuels. For additional flexibility, extensions to
this baseLPstructure often include:
•MILP: Incorporates binary or integer constraints for modeling unit com-
mitment, investmentthresholds, ortechnologyactivationdecisionsFloudas
and Lin [65].
•Multi-period formulations: Includes inter-temporal coupling (e.g., via
storage dynamics or investment rollouts), often spanning multi-decade
horizons.
•Stochastic or robust formulations: Used to capture uncertainty in de-
mand trajectories, technology costs, or resource availability Conejo and
Wu [31], Forootani et al. [66].
This mathematical backbone forms the core of theRE-LLMframework,
upon which surrogate modeling andLLM-based explanation layers are built.
This model presents a cost-optimization framework for evaluating land-
based greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation strategies in Germany’sLULUCF(Land
Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry) sector over the 2020–2050 period.
It simultaneously considersFMoptions (e.g., afforestation, set-aside con-
servation, peatland rewetting) and agriculture and soils interventions (e.g.,
agroforestry, cover crops, soil carbon enhancement), each characterized by
region- and time-specific cost and abatement profiles. The objective func-
tion minimizes total system cost, including both investment and operational
9
expenditures as well as CO2 allowance purchases, subject to a series of con-
straints. These include annualGHGreduction targets, land availability limits,
technology adoption rates, and national peatland restoration mandates. By
integrating physical, economic, and policy dimensions, the model identifies
least-cost deployment pathways while preserving feasibility and equity across
space and time. It is intended to support climate policy design, investment
planning, and scenario evaluation in alignment with national and European
Union (EU) mitigation goals.
2.1.1. Sets
T:Set of yearst= 2020, . . . ,2050(5)
R:Set of regions (e.g., DE1–DEG) (6)
F:Set of Forest Management (FM) options (7)
A:Set of Agriculture and Soils mitigation options (8)
2.2. Parameters
costInvLevelFMst,f,r :Levelized investment cost ofFM[EUR/ha](9)
costMargFMst,f,r :Marginal cost ofFM[EUR/ha](10)
ghgFMst,f,r :GHGremoval potential ofFM[tCO 2eq/ha](11)
FMsgrowtht,f,r :Max growth rate ofFMcapacity[ha/yr](12)
BeechArea02020,r :Available beech land area for set-aside[ha](13)
GrassArea02020,r :Available grassland area[ha](14)
Agriarea02020,r :Available agricultural area[ha](15)
CO2pricet :CO 2 price in yeart(16)
ghgTargetLULUCFt :GHGabatement target in yeart[MtCO2eq](17)
α:Fraction of land allowed for rewetting (e.g.,α= 0.05)
(18)
initRewetting:Initial rewetted area in 2020 [ha] (19)
10
2.3. Decision Variables
capf (t, r) :Implementation area ofFMtechfin regionrat yeart,(20)
capa(t, r) :Implementation area of Agri techain regionrat yeart,(21)
costf (t, f, r),costa(t, a, r) :Total cost contributions,(22)
ghgAbatef (t, f, r),ghgAbatea(t, a, r) :GHGremoved by tech,(23)
purCO2LULUCF(t) :CO 2 allowances purchased to meet the targets [tCO2eq],
(24)
CO2gapRewt:Additional CO 2 to meet peatland target [tCO2eq].(25)
3. Objective Function
The objective function is to minimize total discounted cost over all years:
minTotal_cost=
X
t∈T
hcostAnnualFMs(t) +costAnnualAgri(t)
106
+γ·CO2price(t)·purCO2LULUCF(t)
i
,(26)
where the coefficientγ= 1.1represents the CO 2 credit price, which is the
amount paid to purchase credits from outside the country to meet speci-
fied targets. To encourage the use of domestic resources for climate goals,
the price of external carbon credits is assumed to be 10% higher than the
domestic carbon price in the same year in the base scenarios.
3.1. Constraints on Forest ManagementGHGAbatement
FMoptionscontributetoGHGabatementthroughreforestation, set-asideof
naturalforests, andrewettingofdrainedpeatlands. Eachoption’spotentialis
quantified by a technology- and region-specific removal factor, which scales
with the implemented area. These equations ensure consistency between
physical land use and reported emission reductions, enabling accountability
in policy assessments.
11
ghgAbate(t, f, r) =ghgFMs(t, f, r)·cap(t, f, r),(27)
ghgAbateAnnualFMs(t) =
X
f,r
ghgAbate(t, f, r),(28)
totGHGabatementFMs=
X
t
ghgAbateAnnualFMs(t).(29)
3.2. Agriculture and SoilsGHGAbatement
Agriculture and soil-based mitigation options such as agroforestry, cover
cropping, and biochar application offer complementary benefits to forest-
based strategies. The model quantifies theirGHGremoval as a product of
regional removal factors and adopted land area. This allows a comparative
analysis of cost-effectiveness across sectors.
ghgAbate(t, a, r) =ghgAgri(t, a, r)·cap(t, a, r),(30)
ghgAbateAnnualAgri(t) =
X
a,r
ghgAbate(t, a, r),(31)
totGHGabatementAgri=
X
t
ghgAbateAnnualAgri(t).(32)
3.3. Cost Equations
The total mitigation cost combines levelized capital expenditures (CAPEX)
and marginal operational expenditures (OPEX) with a discount rate of 5%.
This reflects real-world investment and maintenance requirements for both
FMand Agriculture interventions. The separation of cost components ensures
flexibility in sensitivity analyses and policy design (e.g.,CAPEXsubsidies or
carbon pricing adjustments).
12
cost(t, f, r) = (costInvLevelFMs(t, f, r) +costMargFMs(t, f, r))·cap(t, f, r),
(33)
costAnnualFMs(t) =
X
f,r
cost(t, f, r),(34)
cost(t, a, r) = (costInvLevelAgri(t, a, r) +costMargAgri(t, a, r))·cap(t, a, r),
(35)
costAnnualAgri(t) =
X
a,r
cost(t, a, r).(36)
3.4.GHGTarget Satisfaction (LULUCFSector)
This constraint ensures that the combinedGHGabatement from all land-
based options, plus any purchased CO2 allowances, meets the predefined
LULUCFsector targets. It reflects national or EU-level commitments under
climate agreements, and allows the model to explore least-cost pathways to
compliance.
ghgAbateAnnualFMs(t)
106 + ghgAbateAnnualAgri(t)
106 +purCO2LULUCF(t)
≥ghgTargetLULUCF(t).(37)
3.5. Peatland Policy Target (2030 National Plan)
The Peatland policy target should satisfy the following constraint:
X
r
ghgAbatef (2030,PC_Rewetting, r) +CO2gapRewt≥5·10 6.(38)
3.6. Land Use Constraints
These constraints safeguard sustainable land use by ensuring that the
total area allocated to different mitigation options does not exceed avail-
able resources. For example, only a fraction of grassland and agricultural
land is made available for reforestation or agroforestry, based on biophysical
13
feasibility, biodiversity protection, or food security considerations.
X
f∈SetAside
cap(2050, f, r)≤BeechArea02020,r,(39)
X
f∈Plantation
cap(2050, f, r)≤0.1·GrassArea02020,r,(40)
cap(2050,PC_Rewetting, r)≤α·(Agriarea0 2020,r +GrassArea02020,r),
(41)
cap(2050,Agri01_AGC, r)≤0.1·Agriarea0 2020,r,(42)
cap(2050,Agri05_Agroforestry, r)≤0.1·GrassArea0 2020,r.(43)
3.7. Growth Constraints
Adoption of mitigation measures is constrained by annual growth rates,
which represent capacity limitations in terms of labor, machinery, institu-
tional readiness, and ecological factors. These dynamics prevent unrealistic
jumps in land use and reflect the inertia of system transformation.
cap(t, f, r)−cap(t−1, f, r)≤FMsgrowtht−1,r,
cap(t, a, r)−cap(t−1, a, r)≤Agrigrowtht−1,r,
cap(2020, f, r) = 0,
cap(2020, a, r) = 0.
4. Scenario-Based Modeling and Interpretation Strategy usingRE-LLMFrame-
work
Building on foundational applications ofLLMs in scientific and energy do-
mains, we now turn to a domain-specific implementation—RE-LLM—designed
tooperationalizethesecapabilitiesinthecontextofland-basednegativeemis-
sionoptimization. ByfocusingontheGermanLULUCFsector, wedemonstrate
how classical scenario-based optimization, machine learning emulation, and
LLM-powered narrative generation can be integrated into a cohesive frame-
work. The following sections detail the individual components ofRE-LLM,
fromGAMS-based scenario optimization to interpretable surrogate modeling
and natural language-driven stakeholder interaction.
To systematically analyze the results of scenario-based energy system
optimization, we develop a comprehensive computational framework that
integrates optimization outputs, structured feature engineering, statistical
14
correlation analysis, and interpretable machine learning. The key compo-
nents of this pipeline are: (i) Scenario Generation and Feature Construction,
(ii) Correlation and Clustering of Scenarios, (iii) Machine Learning Surrogate
Modeling, (iv) Natural Language Querying viaLLMs, where will be discussed
in details bellow.
4.1. Scenario Generation and Feature Construction
We begin by generating a bank of scenarios using theGAMS-based1 opti-
mization model, which explores different assumptions on CO2prices,FMprac-
tices, land area availability, andGHGemission targets. For each scenario, key
outputs such as abatement levels (ghgAbateFMs) and technology capacities
are exported asGDX2 files.
From these optimization outputs, we extract relevant parameters and
construct structured input-output datasets. Global and regional trends (e.g.,
trends in CO2price, BeechArea0, GrassArea0) are computed using moving-
window regression techniques. These features are then aligned across scenar-
ios, normalized, and stored in a structured dictionary indexed by scenario
name.
While this preprocessing provides a clean and harmonized dataset, the
design of features is not merely a technical step but is driven by deeper
methodological considerations. In particular, two core scientific motivations
guide the feature construction process:
•Curse of Dimensionality and Redundancy:Many raw outputs from in-
tegrated assessment models exhibit strong temporal autocorrelations
and structured inter-regional patterns. Naively using high-resolution
time series as learning inputs leads to inflated dimensionality with di-
minishing information gain, increasing the risk of overfitting, higher
sample complexity, and poor generalization across scenarios.
•Interpretability and Policy Relevance:From a practical standpoint, in-
terpretable features such as trend slopes, terminal values, or regional
1General Algebraic Modeling System, is a high-level modeling system used for mathe-
matical programming and optimization problems.
2GAMSData eXchange, is a binary file format used by theGAMSmodeling system to store
and exchange data.
15
aggregates offer more insight to decision-makers than opaque, high-
dimensional vectors. This enhances explainability and preserves trace-
ability between the features and underlying policy levers.
This scale of data is problematic for two core reasons: (i) Redundant
Information, i.e. many values are temporally or spatially autocorrelated. In-
cluding the full time-series as input leads to sparsity in the effective feature
space and poor generalization for learning algorithms; (ii) Sample Complex-
ity, i.e. high-dimensional inputs drastically increase the number of samples
required to ensure model generalization. This is especially limiting when
scenario runs are computationally expensive or limited in scope.
Methodological Approach.We adopted a three-stage strategy to extract and
refine features for each scenario:
1.Temporal Trend Features:For every region–technology pair and time-
series variable (e.g., investment cost,FMarea), we extracted three
summary statistics:
•Initial value (typically year 2020),
•Final value (typically year 2050),
•Slope of the linear trend over the time horizon (via ordinary least
squares regression).
These statistics compactly encode long-term trajectories and inter-
annual variability (see Figures 3, 1).
2.Global and Regional Aggregates:For system-level drivers such as the
CO2 priceorLULUCFGHGtargets, wecomputedglobaltrendfeaturesand
broadcasted them across regions to maintain a uniform feature space
(see Figures 7, 8). Additionally, region-level static datasets (e.g., ini-
tial agricultural area) were harmonized and merged into each scenario
feature array.
3.Normalization and Scaling:To ensure numerical stability and miti-
gate scale-induced biases in downstream models, all numerical features
were normalized to the[0,1]interval using Min-Max scaling, excluding
categorical features such asRegionandTechnology.
Taken together, these three stages yield a structured and compact fea-
ture space that captures both temporal dynamics and structural heterogene-
ity across scenarios. Rather than simply reducing data dimensionality, the
16
design ensures that the extracted features remain faithful to the underly-
ing system logic and policy levers. This design balances interpretability and
predictive power:
•InterpretableML:Each feature has a direct correspondence to domain
concepts (e.g., investment cost growth, land-use potential), supporting
explainableAIand policy insight.
•Scenario Comparability:Uniform feature extraction across scenarios
enables clustering, sensitivity analysis, and meta-modeling across the
full scenario space.
•Model Efficiency:By distilling temporal data into compact trend sum-
maries, we reduce the dimensionality by more than 95% while preserv-
ing signal relevance.
4.1.1. Scenario Generation and Global Sensitivity Design
Starting from a calibrated base scenario, we construct a 26-member ex-
periment
S={S01, . . . , S26},
bymultiplicativelyscaling a set of key drivers—carbon price (CO 2 price),
forest-managementgrowthceilings(FMsgrowth), availablelandbases(BeechArea0,
GrassArea0), cost coefficients (costInv, costMarg), and the sector-wide miti-
gationconstraint(τ LULUCF
t )—withfactors{0.8,1.0,1.2}(andafewstress-test
values{0.5,1.3,1.5}) 3. The procedure yields afull-factorialdesign in which
every input combination is solved on the full 2020–2050 horizon. Although
the framework can easily generate hundreds of combinations, restricting the
study to26 well-chosen perturbationskeeps the optimization workload trans-
parent and auditable while still delivering the breadth required for policy
analysis. This choice is scientifically defensible for four reasons:
1.Interaction capture: simultaneous perturbation of all inputs allows
higher-order interactions (e.g. cost×land, price×growth) to be learned
by the surrogate, avoiding the bias of one-factor-at-a-time sampling.
3APythonroutine reads the baseline withgdxpds, applies the scaling to theValue
column of each symbol, and writes a new GDX whose filename encodes the factors
17
2.Uniform hyper-cube coverage: scaling preserves the empirically cali-
brated inter-regional ratios while probing the edges of plausible policy
and biophysical envelopes, delivering a near-orthogonal skeleton of the
input space with only26GAMSsolves.
3.Horizon-based robustness: because each run spans 2020–2050, the bank
reveals how early-period shocks propagate into long-term land-use lock-
ins or cost escalations, insights that single-year perturbations cannot
offer.
4.Policy traceability: scenarios are grouped into intuitive themes (un-
changed baselineS11; single-lever testsS07− −S10; compound high-
ambition packagesS24− −S26), enabling direct mapping from quan-
titative outcomes to stakeholder questions and to the narrative layer
produced later via theLLM.
Overall, the design is a computationally light proxy for larger Sobol Sobol
[67] or Latin-Hypercube McKay et al. [68] experiments, yet retains the sta-
tistical power needed for variance decomposition and surrogate training.
4.2. Correlation and Clustering of Scenarios
LetS={S 1, S2, . . . , SN }denote the set ofNscenarios. For each scenario
Si ∈ S, we associate a data matrixMi ∈R T×d , whereTis the number of
region–technology–time entries anddis the number of variables of interest.
Depending on the analysis,Mi may represent:
•Input features:constructed parameters such as CO 2price trajectories,
land availability, or marginal abatement costs,
•Output results:optimization outcomes such as ghgAbateFMs, cost-
TechFMs, or capAgri.
General Method.Each matrixM i is standardized by applying per-feature
z-score normalization4, producing fMi. We then vectorize:
mi := vec(fMi)∈R T·d ,∀i= 1, . . . , N.
4Z-normalization (standardization) rescales features to zero mean and unit variance
Jain et al. [69].
18
The similarity between any two scenariosSi andS j is measured using the
Pearson correlation coefficient Pearson [70]:
ρij := ⟨mi −¯mi, mj −¯mj⟩
∥mi −¯mi∥ · ∥mj −¯mj∥,
where¯mi denotes the mean of vectormi. Collecting all pairwise similarities
yields the correlation matrix:
C:= [ρ ij]1≤i,j≤N .
To obtain a dissimilarity measure suitable for clustering, we set:
Dij := 1−ρ ij,for alli̸=j.
Using the condensed form ofD, we compute a hierarchical clustering linkage
matrixZwith theaveragelinkage criterion:
Z:=linkage(condense(D),method=“average”).
The dendrogramTderived fromZprovides a hierarchical visualization of
scenario similarities.
Applications.This general procedure is applied in two complementary ways:
1.Input-space analysis:M i correspondstothefeaturematrixX i, enabling
us to cluster scenarios according to their underlying assumptions (e.g.,
CO2price trajectories, land use, costs).
2.Output-space analysis:M i corresponds to the output matrixYi, allow-
ing us to examine whether distinct input assumptions yield converging
or diverging optimal outcomes (e.g., abatement levels, technology ca-
pacities).
Together, these analyses reveal both structural similarities in scenario design
and functional similarities in optimization results.
4.2.1. Scenario Ranking and Interpretation
Given the correlation matrixC= [ρ ij]derived either from the input
features or the optimization outputs (as defined earlier), we aim to iden-
tify extremal pairs of scenarios that reflect maximal and minimal similarity.
Formally, define the set of all unordered scenario pairs:
P:=

(i, j)∈ {1, . . . , N}2 :i < j
	
.
19
We then compute the following:
(ˆimax, ˆjmax) = arg max
(i,j)∈P
ρij,
(ˆimin, ˆjmin) = arg min
(i,j)∈P
ρij.
Letρ max :=ρ ˆimaxˆjmax andρ min :=ρ ˆiminˆjmin denote the corresponding corre-
lation values. These pairs indicate, respectively:
•The most similar scenario pair(sˆimax, sˆjmax)under the selected correla-
tion metric, and
•The most dissimilar (potentially outlier) scenario pair(sˆimin, sˆjmin).
Such rankings are instrumental for:
1. identifying clusters of similar behavior in the input or output space;
2. detecting atypical scenarios that diverge from the overall structure;
3. selecting representative scenarios from dense clusters for further inter-
pretability and policy insight.
4.3. Machine Learning Surrogate Modeling.
LetD={(x i, yi)}n
i=1 denote a supervised training dataset constructed
from scenario-enhanced features and corresponding optimization outputs.
Eachx i ∈R d is a feature vector comprising normalized input attributes (e.g.,
region, technology, CO2 price, land use), andyi ∈Ris the target variable,
such as capFMs, ghgAbateFMs, or costTechFMs.
We seek to learn a predictive mappingˆy=fθ(x)that approximates the
underlying (black-box) optimization operatorO(x):
fθ(x)≈ O(x),
whereθdenotes the parameters of the surrogate model, which can be learned
using:
•Tree-based models:RFs, Gradient Boosted Trees (e.g.,XGBoost),
•Neural models:FeedforwardDeepNeuralNetworks(DNNs),LSTMs, Trans-
formers.
20
To improve generalization and robustness, we employK-fold ensembling
strategies. Specifically, let{D k}K
k=1 denote partitions of the training setD,
and letθk be the model parameters trained on thek-th subset. The ensemble
prediction is given by:
ˆy(x) :=1
K
KX
k=1
fθk(x),
which corresponds to uniform averaging (bagging) overKindependently
trained models. In the case of tree-based models likeRFs, this procedure
reflects averaging over randomized decision trees; for neural networks, each
fθk may correspond to a differently initializedDNN.
Letˆyi := ˆy(xi)denote the predicted value for test inputxi. We evaluate
prediction quality using two standard regression metrics:
RMSE:=
vuut 1
m
mX
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2,
R2 := 1−
Pm
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
Pm
i=1(yi −¯y)2 ,
wheremis the number of test samples and¯y:= 1
m
Pm
i=1 yi is the empirical
mean of the test targets.
This surrogate modeling strategy enables rapid approximation of op-
timization outcomes across large scenario banks, reducing computational
cost and facilitating downstream tasks such as uncertainty quantification,
SHAP-based interpretability, and interactive stakeholder querying via lan-
guage models.
4.3.1. Interpretability via SHAP Analysis
To interpret the surrogate model’s predictions, we employ SHAP (SHap-
ley Additive exPlanations), a game-theoretic approach for computing feature
attributions Lundberg and Lee [71]5. Given a predictive modelf:R d →R
and an inputx∈R d, SHAP approximatesf(x)using an additive feature
attribution model:
f(x)≈ϕ 0 +
dX
j=1
ϕj(x),
5We adopt the SHAP framework for feature attribution.
21
where: -ϕ 0 =E x′[f(x′)]is the baseline (expected) prediction under the
training distribution, -ϕj(x)is the contribution of featurejto the deviation
from the baseline prediction, - and the vectorϕ(x) = (ϕ 1(x), . . . , ϕd(x))
satisfies local accuracy and consistency properties from cooperative game
theory.
In our ensemble framework, where we train a collection ofKmodels
{fθk}K
k=1, we compute SHAP explanations for each model individually and
aggregate the results. LetX(ℓ) ⊆X test be a randomly sampled subset of size
m, drawn without replacement. For modelkand subsetℓ, let:
Φ(k,ℓ) ∈R m×d with entriesΦ (k,ℓ)
i,j =ϕ (k)
j (x(ℓ)
i ),
denote the SHAP attribution matrix, wherex(ℓ)
i ∈X (ℓ) andϕ (k)
j denotes the
SHAP value from modelfθk.
We compute the average SHAP matrix overLrandom samples per model:
¯Φ(k) := 1
L
LX
ℓ=1
Φ(k,ℓ) ∈R m×d.
Then, the final ensemble SHAP explanation is obtained by averaging
across theKensemble models:
¯Φ(ensemble) := 1
K
KX
k=1
¯Φ(k) ∈R m×d.
Each row¯ϕ(xi)∈R d of ¯Φ(ensemble) provides a vector of local feature attri-
butions for the predictionf(xi), enabling granular insight into which features
drive the surrogate model’s behavior under specific scenario conditions.
This interpretability layer is essential for: diagnosing which features in-
fluence optimal decisions (e.g., CO2 prices, land use constraints), explaining
why similar inputs yield different outputs in some scenarios, and supporting
transparent communication of results to non-technical stakeholders.
Extension: Global SHAP Values and Theoretical Guarantees.While local
SHAP valuesϕ j(x)provide per-sample attributions, global feature impor-
tance can be assessed by aggregating these values across a population. The
global SHAP value of featurejover a test distributionXtest ={x 1, . . . , xm}
22
is defined as the average absolute contribution:
Φglobal
j := 1
m
mX
i=1
|ϕj(xi)|, j= 1, . . . , d.
Equivalently, for ensemble explanations with matrix¯Φ(ensemble) ∈R m×d as
defined previously, we compute:
Φglobal := 1
m
mX
i=1
¯ϕ(xi)
 ∈R d,
where the absolute value is elementwise. This yields a ranking of features by
their average marginal contribution to model predictions across the dataset.
SHAP values arise from the unique solution to the class of additive feature
attribution methods that satisfy the following axioms (as shown in Lundberg
and Lee [71]):
1.Local Accuracy (Efficiency):
f(x) =ϕ 0 +
dX
j=1
ϕj(x),∀x∈ X,
ensuring that the model’s prediction is decomposed exactly into feature
contributions.
2.Missingness:
Ifx j is missing or not used inf,thenϕ j(x) = 0.
3.Consistency (Monotonicity):For any two modelsfandf ′ such that:
∀x, f ′(x)−f ′(x−j)≥f(x)−f(x −j)⇒ϕ f′
j (x)≥ϕ f
j (x),
the attribution to featurejshould not decrease if the marginal contri-
bution ofjincreases inf ′ relative tof.
These axioms ensure that SHAP values are the unique solution to the
Shapley value problem when applied to machine learning explanations under
the additive model assumption:
g(x) =ϕ 0 +
dX
j=1
ϕj(x),
23
whereg(x)is the interpretable surrogate forf(x).
Consequently, SHAP offers both theoretical rigor and empirical utility
for understanding the contribution of features across both local and global
levels. The global SHAP vectorΦglobal directly supports variable importance
ranking and sensitivity analysis over scenario-based optimizations.
4.4. Natural Language Querying viaLLMs
To bridge quantitative modeling and qualitative stakeholder interaction,
we formalize a pipeline for natural language querying using aLLMinformed
by scenario-based optimization data. LetQdenote a free-form stakeholder
query, such as:
Q:“What happens if CO 2 price increases by 20%?”
Parameter Extraction.Wedefineakeyword-to-parametermappingM:L →
P, whereLis a space of linguistic patterns (e.g., “CO2 price”, “investment
cost”) andPis the set of scenario parameters:
P:={CO 2price,FMsgrowth,costMargAgri, . . .}.
GivenQ, we apply regular expression matching to identify a corresponding
model parameterp ∗ ∈ Pand a desired multiplicative changeλ >0, parsed
as:
Q 7→(p∗, λ),e.g.,λ= 1.2for +20%.
Scenario Matching.LetS={S 1, . . . , SN }denote the set of all scenarios,
each represented by a parameter vector:
Si := (p(i)
1 , . . . , p(i)
d )∈R d,
wherep (i)
j is the value of parameterpj in scenarios i. Define:
Smatch :=

si ∈ S:

p∗
i
¯p∗ −λ
 < ϵ

as the set of matching or nearest scenarios with respect top∗, within tolerance
ϵ >0.
24
Scenario Clustering.LetC∈R N×N be the correlation matrix of scenario
outputs (or inputs), andZ∈R (N−1)×4 the linkage matrix from hierarchical
clustering. Using a fixed thresholdt >0, we assign each scenarioSi a cluster
label:
ℓi :=fcluster(Z, t),
with cluster membershipCk :={S i :ℓ i =k}.
The matching scenario setSmatch is then assigned to a dominant cluster
Ck∗, from which we extract the cluster-wide scenario descriptions and average
correlation:
¯ρk∗ := 1
|Ck∗|2
X
i,j∈Ck∗
ρ(Si, Sj).
Prompt Construction.We construct a structured promptΠ(Q, p∗, λ,Ck∗,¯ρ)
for theLLM, encoding:
•the original queryQ,
•matched parameterp ∗ and requested changeλ,
•representative scenarios fromC k∗,
•cluster summary statistics (size, average correlation).
LLMQuerying.Finally, the promptΠis submitted to anLLM:
LLM(Π)⇝Explanation,
which generates a textual response describing expected changes in output
quantities (e.g., cost, abatement, land use), derived from trends within the
matched cluster. This approach enables a seamless integration of model-
driven scenario analytics with human-centered decision support, grounded in
optimization results, similarity structure, and interpretable language.
Outlook.This integrated pipeline opens the door to horizon-based optimiza-
tion and multi-factor sensitivity analysis, allowing researchers and decision-
makers to explore a wide range of assumptions and assess their systemic
implications in a transparent and data-driven manner. While 26 scenarios
are considered in this study for tractability and interpretability, the frame-
work is scalable to a larger scenario bank.
25
5. Simulation results for the Case Study
As mentioned, in complex systems modeling—such as land-use, forestry,
andclimatemitigationplanning—rawscenariooutputsareoftenhigh-dimensional,
heterogeneous, and temporally rich. A single scenario can yield thousands of
data points across multiple indicators, regions, technologies, and time steps.
While this level of detail is essential for representing systemic complexity,
it presents a fundamental challenge for data-driven analysis: thecurse of
dimensionality.
To address this, we constructed a compact, interpretable, and generaliz-
able set of features via a carefully designed feature engineering pipeline. The
objective is not only to reduce the dimensionality of the scenario data but
also to capture domain-relevant dynamics (e.g., temporal trends, regional
disparities, and cross-technology interactions) that preserve signal fidelity
while enhancing learning efficiency.
5.1. Feature Illustration
To illustrate the nature and diversity of the raw scenario inputs before
feature engineering, we show a representative subset of time-series and static
parameters from the base scenario run of the Zero Negative Emission opti-
mization model in Section 4.1. These variables form the foundational drivers
of land-use allocation and mitigation cost outcomes in subsequent analysis.
Figures 1– 2 illustrateGHGremoval, marginal cost, and capacity growth
trajectories forFMtechnologies. Removal potentials differ both by technology
(e.g., rewetting vs. reforestation) and region, with linear growth patterns
constrained by annual adoption ceilings. Marginal costs are largely stable for
mostFMs but escalate significantly for peatland rewetting due to increasing
marginal difficulty of restoration. Growth patterns (Figure 1) reflect resource
constraints and technology-specific saturation points.
Figures 3 and 5 show theinvestment-related cost metrics forFMs. The
investment level cost(e/ha) remains relatively stable over time, reflecting
technology-specificCAPEXassumptions. In contrast,total investment costs
(Me/yr)growasafunctionofbothunitcostsandcumulativeareaexpansion.
Figure 6 displays theinitial beech and grassland areas by regionin 2020,
which define the upper bounds for set-aside conservation and reforestation
measures. Substantial regional disparities are evident, with DE1–DE2 host-
ing the largest beech areas, while grassland is concentrated in DE2, DE9,
26
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Forest Managements (FMs) Growth (ha)
Forest Management(FM) Growth Evolution
Region / T echnology
Region
DE1
DE2
DE3
DE4
DE5
DE6
DE7
DE8
DE9
DEA
DEB
DEC
DEE
DED
DEF
DEG
T echnology
FM01_PSA
FM02_TSA
FM03_Beech
FM04_DouglasFir
FM05_Oak
FM06_ScotPine
PC_Rewetting
Figure 1:FMcapacity growth (ha) by technology and region over 2020–2050. Expansion is
constrained by annual adoption ceilings, reflecting practical limits on labor, infrastructure,
and ecological readiness.
and DEA. These static land-endowment constraints critically shape feasible
deployment paths forFMoptions.
Figures 8 and 7 present theGHGtarget trajectory for theLULUCFsector
and theCO 2 price pathover 2020–2050, respectively. The targets increase
steadily toward42MtCO 2eq by 2050, while the CO2 price rises from be-
lowe20/tCO 2 to approximatelye250/tCO 2 over the same horizon. To-
gether, these time-series define the policy ambition level and economic in-
centives for mitigation measures.
These raw variables, along with other scenario parameters (e.g., agricul-
turalmitigationoptions), aredirectlyextractedfromtheGAMSmodeloutputs.
While each parameter has clear sectoral relevance, taken together they form a
high-dimensional dataset. Feature engineering (Section 4.1) condenses these
into compact temporal and aggregated descriptors for efficient learning and
scenario clustering, without losing interpretability.
Tables 1 and 2 show example feature vectors for ScenarioS10from the
FMscenario bank in Table Appendix .2 and ScenarioS24from the Agricul-
ture (Agri) scenario bank Table Appendix .2, detailing the complete set of
quantitative attributes for a specific region-technology pair under the respec-
tive scenario settings. It is worth to highlight that each scenario inFMand
Agrihas a feature matrix of the size112×25and96×21, respectively. This
27
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16GHG Removal (MtCO2)
Green House Gas (GHG) Removals by FMs Evolution
Region / T echnology
Region
DE1
DE2
DE3
DE4
DE5
DE6
DE7
DE8
DE9
DEA
DEB
DEC
DEE
DED
DEF
DEG
T echnology
FM01_PSA
FM02_TSA
FM03_Beech
FM04_DouglasFir
FM05_Oak
FM06_ScotPine
PC_Rewetting
Figure 2: GHG removals byFMtechnologies and regions over 2020–2050. Growth patterns
reflect technology-specific removal factors and capacity adoption limits.
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000Investment Level Cost ( )
Investment Level Cost of Forest Management (FMs) Evolution
Region / T echnology
Region
DE1
DE2
DE3
DE4
DE5
DE6
DE7
DE8
DE9
DEA
DEB
DEC
DEE
DED
DEF
DEG
T echnology
FM01_PSA
FM02_TSA
FM03_Beech
FM04_DouglasFir
FM05_Oak
FM06_ScotPine
PC_Rewetting
Figure 3: Investment level cost (e/ha) forFMtechnologies. Assumed constant in real terms
for most options, reflecting stable CAPEX assumptions across the planning horizon.
28
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
0
20
40
60
80
100
Marginal Cost ( /tCO2)
Marginal Cost of ForestManagements (FMs) Evolution
Region / T echnology
Region
DE1
DE2
DE3
DE4
DE5
DE6
DE7
DE8
DE9
DEA
DEB
DEC
DEE
DED
DEF
DEG
T echnology
FM03_Beech
FM04_DouglasFir
FM05_Oak
FM06_ScotPine
PC_Rewetting
Figure 4: Marginal cost evolution ofFMtechnologies. Peatland rewetting exhibits signifi-
cant cost escalation over time due to increasing marginal restoration difficulty.
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000Investment Cost ( )
Investment Cost of ForestManagements (FMs) Evolution
Region / T echnology
Region
DE1
DE2
DE3
DE4
DE5
DE6
DE7
DE8
DE9
DEA
DEB
DEC
DEE
DED
DEF
DEG
T echnology
FM01_PSA
FM02_TSA
FM03_Beech
FM04_DouglasFir
FM05_Oak
FM06_ScotPine
PC_Rewetting
Figure5: Annualinvestmentcosts(Me)forFMtechnologies. Growthreflectsthecombined
effect of cumulative capacity additions and constant per-unit investment levels.
29
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Initial Beech Area (ha) ×105
DE5
DE3
DE6
DE4
DED
DEC
DEE
DEF
DE8
DEG
DE9
DEA
DEB
DE7
DE2
DE1Region
Initial Beech Area by Region (2020)
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
Initial Grass Area (ha) ×106
Initial Grass Area by Region (2020)
Figure 6: Initial beech and grassland area by region (2020). Static land-use endowments
serve as constraints forFMdeployment pathways.
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
50
100
150
200
250CO2 Price ( /tCO2)
CO2 Price Evolution Over Time
Figure 7: CO 2 price trajectory over 2020–2050. Rising prices strengthen the economic
incentive for land-based mitigation measures.
30
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Year
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Green House Gas (GHG) Target LULUCF (MtCO2)
GHG Target LULUCF Evolution Over Time
Figure 8:GHGtarget trajectory for theLULUCFsector over 2020–2050. Increasing targets
reflect progressive national and EU climate policy commitments.
shows how feature engineering helps for order reduction in the input dataset.
5.2. Input–Output feature correlation (Forest Management (FM) vs. Agricul-
ture)
Both theFMand Agriculture input–feature correlation matrices exhibit
near-perfectscenario–scenario similarity: almost all off-diagonal Pearson co-
efficients arer≈0.999–1.000, and hierarchical clusters merge at essentially
zero height. This pattern implies that scenarios differ mainly by proportional
rescalings of the same underlying signals across regions/technologies/years.
The combination of multiplicative scenario levers (e.g., uniform scaling of
prices, areas, or growth caps) and subsequent feature normalization further
compresses variation, inflating collinearity and rendering the scenario space
effectivelylow-dimensional. Practically, bothFMandAgricultureinputsform
a single dense cluster, so unsupervised grouping provides limited separation
and feature-importance attribution may be fragile unless the perturbation
design is diversified (e.g., introducing orthogonal shocks by feature group,
region-specific shifts, or non-proportional changes).
Intput–feature correlation.The correlation matrices for the input features
(Figures 9 and 10) reveal extremely high pairwise correlations across the 26
scenarios for bothFMand Agriculture inputs. Specifically, theFMinput
31
Table 1: An example of feature vector for ScenarioS10in the bank of scenarios for
FMoptimization
Feature Value
Region DE2
Technology FM04_DouglasFir
CostMarg_2020 2.272816
CostMarg_2050 2.914732
CostMarg_Slope 0.021397
CostInv_2020 1654.288462
CostInv_2050 2121.512452
CostInv_Slope 15.574133
CostInvLevel_2020 5023.172313
CostInvLevel_2050 8052.6193
CostInvLevel_Slope 100.981566
GHG_2020 11.52
GHG_2050 13.08
GHG_Slope 0.052
ForestGrowth_2020 10.461851
ForestGrowth_2050 10.461851
ForestGrowth_Slope 0.0
CO2_2020 20.0
CO2_2050 249.197564
CO2_Slope 7.182224
GHGTarget_2020 1.92
GHGTarget_2050 51.0
GHGTarget_Slope 1.495102
InitialBeechArea 423046.85
InitialGrassArea 1199109.02
matrix exhibits correlation coefficients in the range[0.987,1.000]with an
average of0.999, while the Agriculture input matrix is even more tightly
clustered, ranging from0.9997to1.000with an average of0.99998. This
near-perfect correlation structure reflects the fact that the scenario genera-
tion process perturbed key parameters in a highly structured and propor-
tional manner, preserving strong co-movement among input features across
scenarios.
Output–feature correlation (costTechAgri and ghgAbateFMs).Unlike the in-
puts—which form a single, nearly collinear cluster—theoutputsexhibit clear
structure and wider dispersion. The costTechAgri matrix shows several well-
separated clusters (dendrogram splits up to noticeable heights), with pair-
wise correlations ranging from high to only moderate values; small, aligned
perturbations in inputs are thusamplifiedby the optimization into distinct
cost trajectories. This behaviour is consistent with binding constraints and
thresholds (e.g., investment limits, land/area and growth ceilings, carbon-
32
Table 2: An example of feature vector for ScenarioS24in the bank of scenarios for
Agriculture optimization
Feature Value
Region DE3
Technology Agri01_AGC
CostMargAgri_2020 17.25154
CostMargAgri_2050 0.24988
CostMargAgri_Slope -0.566722
CostInvAgri_2020 2476.190476
CostInvAgri_2050 35.866426
CostInvAgri_Slope -81.344135
CostInvLevAgri_2020 158.803346
CostInvLevAgri_2050 2.30019
CostInvLevAgri_Slope -5.216772
GHGAgri_2020 1.8
GHGAgri_2050 1.8
GHGAgri_Slope 0.0
AgriGrowth_2020 20.62545
AgriGrowth_2050 21047.182701
AgriGrowth_Slope 700.885242
Peat_Extraction_2020 0.03
Peat_Extraction_2050 0.3
Peat_Extraction_Slope 0.009
Agriarea0 4836.495
price–driven switching of technologies) that create nonlinear responses: once
a constraint activates, marginal costs jump and scenarios diverge.
In contrast, the output correlations (Figures 11 and 12) display greater
variability, highlighting the system’s sensitivity to input perturbations. For
FMoutputs, represented by ghgAbateFMs, correlations remain high but
show a wider spread ([0.973,1.000], mean0.991), indicating that while most
FMscenarios respond similarly to input changes, certain combinations of
cost, growth constraints, and land availability induce discernible deviations
inGHGabatement trajectories. The effect is more pronounced for Agricul-
ture outputs, represented by costTechAgri, where correlations span a much
broader range ([0.743,1.000], mean0.941). This suggests that agricultural
technology costs are far more sensitive to input parameter variations, likely
due to non-linear cost responses, cross-sectoral interactions, and binding con-
straints in specific scenarios.
Overall, the comparison between input and output correlation structures
underscores two key points: (i) the input space is highly coherent across sce-
narios by design, ensuring controlled and interpretable perturbations, and
(ii) the output space, especially for cost-related agricultural metrics, exhibits
amplified differentiation, revealing which parts of the system are most re-
33
sponsive to policy or techno-economic shifts. This divergence between input
uniformity and output variability is precisely what enables theRE-LLMframe-
work to identify and narratively explain the most policy-relevant sensitivities
in theLULUCFsector.
5.3. Illustration ofMLsurrogate Modeling forFMcapacity
In order to evaluate the predictive capacity of the proposed feature engi-
neering framework, we construct a supervised learning dataset by combining
the scenario outputs from theGAMS-based optimization model with the en-
gineered input features. The raw optimization results are first processed
to extract key variables, including CO2price, FMsgrowth, BeechArea0, and
GrassArea0, along with the target variable capFMs. Global and regional
trend indicators are subsequently derived using moving-window regressions
and integrated with technology–region identifiers to form a structured feature
space. All continuous predictors are scaled using min–max normalization,
while categorical variables (Region, Technology) are represented through
one-hot encoding. The resulting feature arrays are cross-joined with the
corresponding years and aligned with observed capFMs values, yielding a
consistent input–output dataset for model training.
We employ an ensemble ofRFregressors Breiman [72], Pedregosa et al.
[73], trainedonfoldedsub-samplesofthedatasettoensurerobustnessagainst
overfitting and to capture non-linear dependencies between features and for-
est management capacities. Model performance was assessed using out-of-
sample predictions, with metrics reported both in normalized units and in
original hectares.
In the ensemble training ofFMcapacity, we employn folds = 10(cross-
validation) to generate diverse sub-models. Each base learner is aRFRegres-
sor withn_estimators = 50trees and varying random seeds across folds to
promote model diversity. No explicit constraints on tree depth, minimum
split size, or leaf size were introduced. Target values were normalized us-
ing Min–Max scaling before training and subsequently inverse-transformed
for evaluation. This setup provides a balanced ensemble that emphasizes
variance reduction while maintaining computational efficiency.
The ensemble achieved high explanatory power, withR2 scores exceed-
ing0.9440and root mean squared errors (RMSE) on the order of10150.07
hectares. As illustrated in Figure 13, the predicted values exhibit strong
alignment with observed capacities along the 45◦ reference line. These find-
ings confirm that the engineered scenario features effectively encapsulate the
34
S05
S02
S01
S04
S06
S20
S19
S07
S08
S13
S27
S16
S22
S21
S10
S09
S17
S03
S11
S15
S14
S26
S25
S12
S18
S24
S23
Scenario
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
0.0035
0.0040Distance
Forest Management Hierarchical Dendrogram
Figure 9: Hierarchical clustering dendrogram from the correlation matrix corresponding
to bank of scenarios for theFM.
35
S19
S17
S11
S13
S24
S18
S16
S25
S01
S10
S26
S21
S03
S07
S09
S05
S08
S06
S04
S12
S23
S15
S22
S14
S20
S02
Scenario
0.00000
0.00002
0.00004
0.00006
0.00008
0.00010
0.00012Distance
Agriculture Hierarchical Dendrogram
Figure 10: Hierarchical clustering dendrogram from the correlation matrix corresponding
to bank of scenarios for the Agriculture optimization.
36
S19
S07
S08
S11
S01
S20
S22
S09
S10
S06
S12
S17
S14
S03
S15
S27
S16
S13
S04
S25
S23
S18
S02
S21
S24
S26
S05
Scenario
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014Distance
GHGAbateFMs Hierarchical Dendrogram
Figure 11: Hierarchical clustering dendrogram from the correlation matrix corresponding
to the results of bank of scenarios in theFMfor GHGAbateFMs in (27).
37
S16
S20
S21
S01
S08
S25
S24
S18
S26
S02
S10
S23
S14
S12
S06
S17
S11
S15
S19
S22
S13
S05
S07
S04
S09
S03
Scenario
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12Distance
costT echAgri Hierarchical Dendrogram
Figure 12: Hierarchical clustering dendrogram from the correlation matrix corresponding
totheresultsofbankofscenariosintheAgricultureoptimizationforcostTechAgrivariable.
38
0 100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Actual capFMs (ha)
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000Predicted capFMs (ha)
Predicted vs Actual capFMs (Ensemble Voting)
Figure 13: Predicted versus actual values of theFMcapacity variable (capFMs) obtained
using theRFensemble model
main drivers ofFMcapacity, and that the ensemble learning approach yields
stable generalization performance across heterogeneous scenario settings.
To interpret the ensemble predictions, we apply SHAP (SHapley Addi-
tive exPlanations) using a TreeSHAP approach tailored to theRFregres-
sors. The procedure aggregates explanations across models and repeated
subsamples of the test set, ensuring robust feature attribution. Figure 14
illustrates the resulting SHAP summary plot, where each point represents
the marginal contribution of a feature to the predicted Forest Management
capacity (capFMs). Each point represents the marginal contribution of a fea-
ture to the model output across the test data. The horizontal axis indicates
the SHAP value (impact on prediction), while the color encodes the feature
value from low (blue) to high (red). The most influential drivers are the tech-
nologyindicatorFM02_TSA,temporaleffects(year), andinvestment-related
slopes (CostInv_Slope, CostInvLevel_Slope), alongside regional initial con-
ditions such as InitialBeechArea and InitialGrassArea. Positive SHAP val-
ues (right side) increase the predicted capacity, while negative values (left
side) decrease it, with color encoding reflecting the underlying feature val-
ues. This analysis confirms that both cost trends and land endowments
interact strongly with regional and technology-specific factors, shaping the
optimization outcomes and validating the surrogate model’s interpretability
within theRE-LLMpipeline.
39
0.004
 0.002
 0.000 0.002 0.004
SHAP value (impact on model output)
CostMarg_2020
CostMarg_2050
Region_DE2
CostMarg_Slope
Region_DE7
Region_DE9
Region_DE1
T echnology_PC_Rewetting
Region_DEG
Region_DEB
InitialGrassArea
GHG_Slope
ForestGrowth_Slope
ForestGrowth_2050
ForestGrowth_2020
CostInvLevel_Slope
InitialBeechArea
CostInv_Slope
year
T echnology_FM02_TSA
Low
High
Feature value
Figure 14: SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) summary plot for the ensembleRFsur-
rogate model predictingFMcapacity.
40
SHAP-guidedLLMnarratives.To make the language layer faithful to the
underlying surrogate, we use SHAP attributions as a structured control sig-
nal for prompt construction. Concretely, after computing ensemble SHAP
matrices ¯Φ(ensemble) and their global importanceΦglobal (local accuracy, miss-
ingness, and consistency hold by construction), we select the top-kdrivers
(feature, sign, magnitude, representative value) and serialize them into the
LLMprompt used for stakeholder summaries.6. In practice, the SHAP sum-
mary (e.g., Figure 14 for capFMs) identifies cost trends, land endowments,
and technology markers as dominant factors; these are injected into a tem-
plated prompt that theLLMconverts into a concise, audience-appropriate
explanation. By grounding theLLMwith SHAP-ranked evidence, the nar-
rative remains traceable to the model’s feature attributions and reduces the
risk of free-form speculation—operationalizing the link between interpretable
MLand our natural-language interface. In the Appendix Section Appendix .4
a prompt is illustrated to showcase how SHAP analysis can play role in7.
5.4.LLM-driven Stakeholder Interaction
Stakeholders may issue natural language queries, such as“What happens
if CO2 price increases by 20%?”or“What happens if cost of investment in
agriculture i.e. costInvAgri decreases?”. These are mapped to scenario sub-
sets using string parsing and clustering metadata. Prompts are constructed
and sent to anLLM, which returns a human-readable summary.
Query 1 — “What happens if the CO2 price increases by 20%?”.TheLLMmatched
this query to scenarios S06–S08, where the carbon-price multiplier is1.2
while other levers (e.g., FMsgrowth, BeechArea0) vary within their designed
ranges. At the cluster level, these runs fall within a coherent group (high
intra-cluster correlation), so the narrative reflects behavior that is robust
across nearest neighbors. In short, a higher CO2 price strengthens incen-
tives to deploy land-based mitigation earlier and at larger scale: cumulative
GHGabatement rises, reliance on external allowances falls, and technologies
withstrongabatementperhectare(notablypeatlandrewettingandset-aside)
scale faster subject to land and growth ceilings. Cost trajectories increase
6See our SHAP formulation and aggregation acrossKmodels and repeated test sub-
samples, and the definition ofΦglobal for population-level ranking
7For theLLMquery pipeline (parameter parsing, scenario matching/clustering, and
prompt construction), see Section4.4
41
when adoption fronts meet binding constraints, but the net system-cost pres-
sure is partially offset by reduced purchases of CO2 credits (the model pe-
nalizes external credits relative to the domestic price). The explanation is
grounded in the scenario metadata and the correlation-aware clustering used
to construct the prompt, ensuring that the textual summary remains trace-
able to modeled evidence. In Appendix 3 the output of theLLMto this query
is shown.
Query 2 — “What happens if the cost of investment in agriculture (costInvAgri)
decreases?”.For this query, theLLMretrieved the agriculture subset with re-
duced investment costs (e.g., S10:−50%, S11:−20%, S12:−20%with cou-
pled levers) and composed a response against the same cluster-aware tem-
plate. Lower costInvAgri systematically depresses costTechAgri (levelized
costs), bringing forward adoption of agricultural mitigation options (agro-
forestry, cover crops, soil-carbon enhancement) until constrained by land-
shareandannualgrowthcaps. Inturn, themodelshiftspartoftheabatement
burden from forest management to agriculture where the marginal abatement
costbecomescheaper, whilerespectingareaconstraintsandpeatlandpolicies.
Because agricultural outputs in these experiments exhibit wider dispersion
than inputs (optimization non-linearities around binding constraints), the
LLMhighlights conditionals—where/when the steepest costTechAgri declines
appear, and which regions/technologies benefit first—and links them to the
specific cost-lever scenarios surfaced by the matcher. This keeps the narrative
faithful to the designed perturbations while remaining stakeholder-friendly.
In Appendix 4 the output of theLLMto this query is shown.
Reproducibility note.Both paragraphs are generated with the documented
pipeline: (i) parse the natural-language query to extract parameter changes;
(ii) match to nearest scenarios in the bank; (iii) ground the prompt using
output-space correlation structure and cluster representatives; and (iv) re-
turn an explanation that cites the representative scenarios/clusters. This
preserves traceability from theLLMtext to the underlying scenario set and
clustering artifacts.
6. Conclusion
ThispaperintroducedRE-LLM,ahybridframeworkthatintegratesoptimization-
based scenario analysis, machine learning surrogates, and large language
42
models (LLMs) into a unified pipeline for renewable energy and land-use plan-
ning. By combining classicalGAMS-based optimization with structured fea-
ture engineering, correlation and clustering analysis, and surrogate model-
ing, the framework enables rapid exploration of complex scenario spaces.
TheLLMlayer further enhances interpretability by translating quantitative
outputs into accessible narratives tailored to diverse stakeholders.
Through the GermanLULUCFcase study, we demonstrated that surrogate
models (RF,DNN,XGBoost) can reproduce optimization outcomes with high
fidelity while reducing computational requirements by more than an order
of magnitude. SHAP-based interpretability added transparency to model
behavior, highlighting the most influential drivers of mitigation costs and ca-
pacities. Finally, theLLM-assisted querying pipeline illustrated how natural
language interfaces can bridge the gap between technical outputs and action-
able insights, thereby improving stakeholder comprehension and engagement.
Overall,RE-LLMadvances a human-centric paradigm for energy system
modeling, where computational efficiency and interpretability are treated
as complementary design goals. By merging speed, rigor, and accessibility,
the framework supports interactive, multilingual, and policy-relevant engage-
ment with future energy pathways. Future research will extend this approach
toward larger scenario banks, multi-country applications, and deeper inte-
gration ofLLMs with optimization solvers, ultimately contributing to more
transparent and participatory energy transition planning.
Acknowledgment
This study is funded by theMan0EUvRE(100695543), which is co-
financed by means of taxation based on the budget adopted by the repre-
sentatives of the Landtag of Saxony. “Man0EUvRE – Energy System Mod-
elling for Transition to a net-Zero 2050 for EU via REPowerEU,” is funded
by CETPartnership, the European Partnership under Joint Call 2022 for re-
search proposals, co-funded by the European Commission (GAN°101069750).
Appendix .1. Summary of notable energy-system optimization frameworks
43
Table .3: Summary of notable energy-system optimization frameworks.
Framework Licence / language Coupled sectors Typical use case Notable feature(s)
TIMESProprietary model gen-
erator (GAMS)
Power, fuels, industry,
transport, land
National LT planning,
marginal CO2 pricing
Mature IEA-ETSAP
community and large
global database Loulou
et al. [22], ets [74], wik
[75]
MESSAGE-ixHuppmann
et al. [9], mes [76, 77]
Open source
(Python/GAMS)
Full energy, engineer-
ing, economy, environ-
ment (E4)
IAM-consistent energy scenar-
ios, SDG co-analysis
Multiregional,
perfect-foresight,
flexible solver back-end
OSeMOSYSHowells et al.
[2]
MIT-style licence
(Python/GNU MathProg)
Power, fuels; heat &
transport via exten-
sions
Capacity-expansion in
data-poor regions
Minimal core; ideal for
teaching and rapid pro-
totyping
PyPSA/PyPSA-Eur-Sec
Brown et al. [78]
GPL (Python/Pyomo) Electricity, heating,
transport, hydrogen
High-res European sector cou-
pling (hourly)
Integration with open
GIS data;MILPfor unit
commitment pyp [79]
GenXHopkins et al. [80] Apache-2.0 (Julia/
JuMP)
Power; emerging heat
and hydrogen modules
Flexible-resource valuation,
system adequacy
Semi-continuous unit
commitment & storage
clustering
ReEDSHo et al. [81]NRELproprietary (GAMS) Power; links to
e-mobility & fuels
via add-ons
U.S. decarbonisation studies,
transmission siting
Probabilistic
resource-adequacy
and zoning algorithm
EnergyPLANLund et al.
[82]
Freeware GUI (Delphi) Electricity, DH, trans-
port fuels
Hour-level operational feasibil-
ity, policy mixes
“Smart-energy-system”
heuristic with excess
balancing
GCAMCalvin et al. [83] BSD-style (C++) Economy, energy,
land-use, water &
climate
Integrated land-energy path-
ways, AFOLU mitigation
Dynamic-recursive
market equilibrium
approach
PLEXOSEnergy Exem-
plar LLC [84]
Commercial (C#/SQL) Primarily electric-
ity + gas/water
co-simulation
Market dispatch, generation
bidding, nodal prices
Sub-hourly chronologi-
calLP/MILPengine
urbsDorfner [85] MIT licence
(Python/Pyomo)
Multi-commodity
(electricity, heat, hy-
drogen)
Urban & regional capacity ex-
pansion
Straightforward hourly
LP, Pandas native I/O
44
Appendix .2. Bank ofFMand Agriculture scenarios
45
Table .4: Bank of Scenarios forFMoptimization;Legend:*= costInvAgri / costMargAgri / costInvLevelAgri / Agriarea0.
Scenario CO2price FMsgrowth BeechArea0 GrassArea0τ LULUCF
t cap0FMs costMargFMs costInvFMs costInvLevelFMs ghgFMs *
S01 -20% -20% -20% – – – – – – – –
S02 -20% 0% -20% – – – – – – – –
S03 -20% 0% 0% – – – – – – – –
S04 +20% 0% +20% – – – – – – – –
S05 +20% +20% -20% – – – – – – – –
S06 +20% +20% +20% – – – – – – – –
S07 – -20% – – – – – – -20% – –
S08 – -20% – – -20% – – – -20% -20% –
S09 – +20% – – – – – – +20% – –
S10 – +20% – – +20% – – – +20% +20% –
S11 – -20% -20% -20% -20% -20% – – – – –
S12 – +20% +20% +20% +20% +20% – – – – –
S13 – – – – – – – – – – -20%
S14 – – – – – – – – – – +20%
S15 – – – – – – – -20% -20% – –
S16 – – – – – – – -10% +10% – –
S17 – – – – – – – +20% +20% – –
S18 – – – – – – -50% -50% -50% – –
S19 – – – – – – -50% -50% -50% -50% –
S20 – – – – – -20% -20% -20% -20% – –
S21 – – – – – – -20% -20% -20% -20% –
S22 – – – – – +20% +20% +20% +20% – –
S23 – – – – – – +20% +20% +20% +20% –
S24 – – – – – – +50% +50% +50% – –
S25 – – – – – – +50% +50% +50% +50% –
S26 – +30% +30% +30% +30% – – – – – –
46
Table .5: Bank of Scenarios for Agriculture Optimization
Scenario CO2price FMsgrowth BeechArea0 costMargAgri costInvAgri costInvLevelAgri ghgAgri Agrigrowth Agriarea0 PeatExtract
S01 – – – – – – – +90%+90%+90%
S02 – – – – – – – -60%-60%-60%
S03 -20%-20%-20%– – – – – – –
S04 -20%0%-20%– – – – – – –
S05 -20%0%0%– – – – – – –
S06 +20%0%+20%– – – – – – –
S07 +20%+20%-20%– – – – – – –
S08 +20%+20%+20%– – – – – – –
S09 – – – – – – – – – –
S10 – – – – -50%-50%-50%-50%-50%–
S11 – – – – -20%-20%– -20%– –
S12 – – – – -20%-20%-20%– – –
S13 – – – – +20%+20%– +20%– –
S14 – – – – +20%+20%+20%– – –
S15 – – – – -30%-30%– -30%– –
S16 – – – – +70%+70%– +70%– –
S17 – – – -40%– – – -40%– –
S18 – – – +50%– – +50%+50%+50%+50%
S19 – – – +60%– – – +60%– –
S20 – – – +100%+100%+100%– – – –
S21 – – – – – – - 50%– – - 50%
S22 – – – – – – -20%-20%-20%-20%
S23 – – – – – – +20%+20%+20%+ 20%
S24 – – – – – – +50%+50%+50%+50%
S25 – – – – – – +80%+ 80%+ 80%+ 80%
S26 – – – – – – +80%– – +80%
47
Appendix .3. Data and code availability
The full implementation of theRE-LLMframework, including scenario
generation, feature construction, correlation and clustering analysis, surro-
gate modeling, andLLM-assisted interpretation, is openly available atGithub:
https://github.com/Ali-Forootani/RELLMandZenodoAli-Forootani.(2025)
.Ali-Forootani/RELLM:RELLM(v1.0.0).Zenodo.https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.17311775.
The repository provides a reproducible pipeline that integratesGAMSout-
puts, structured feature engineering, surrogate modeling (RF,DNN,XGBoost),
SHAP-based interpretability, and natural-language querying. All scripts,
documentation, and example workflows are included to enable replication
and extension of the results.
All.gdxinput files, theGAMSoptimization code (.gms), and the associ-
ated outputs (.gdx/.csv) used in this study are openly available at Zenodo:
10.5281/zenodo.17077632.
48
Appendix .4.LLMPrompt Example Grounded in SHAP Values
Fortransparencyandreproducibility, wedocumenttheexactprompttem-
plate used to generate stakeholder-oriented narratives from SHAP analysis.
The template is automatically constructed by inserting the top-kSHAP-
ranked features, model performance metrics, and scenario-level highlights.
An example for thecapFMstask is shown below.
Listing 1: Python prompt for stakeholder report
prompt = f"""
You are a sustainability analyst preparing a summary report for
stakeholders, based on a machine learning ensemble model and SHAP
analysis focused on forest management capacity (`capFMs`).
**Objective**: Predict and understand the key drivers of forest
management capacity (`capFMs`)
**Model Performance**:
•R 2 Score: {results_ensemble['r2_original']:.4f}
•RMSE: {results_ensemble['rmse_original']:.2f} hectares
**Top 3 Influential Features (from SHAP analysis across ensemble models
)**:
1. **{top_feature_names[0]}** – SHAP = {top_shap_vals[0]:.3f}, Avg
value = {top_feature_vals[0]:.3f}
2. **{top_feature_names[1]}** – SHAP = {top_shap_vals[1]:.3f}, Avg
value = {top_feature_vals[1]:.3f}
3. **{top_feature_names[2]}** – SHAP = {top_shap_vals[2]:.3f}, Avg
value = {top_feature_vals[2]:.3f}
**Regional & Policy Highlights**:
•Region with highest capFMs potential: **{best_region}**
•Leading growth technology: **{best_tech}**
**Task**:
Craft a clear and professional report that:
- Summarizes the ensemble model's performance in non-technical terms
- Interprets how the top 3 features influence capFMs outcomes across
the ensemble models
- Highlights regional and technological opportunities
- Recommends actions that align with long-term decarbonization goals
49
The tone should be insight-driven, stakeholder-friendly, and suitable
for regional planners, policymakers, and sustainability investors.
Avoid equations or technical jargon—focus on actionable insights.
"""
Appendix .4.1.LLMoutputs in response to SHAP analysis
This listing illustrates how SHAP-derived feature attributions were inte-
grated into a structured natural-language prompt, ensuring that generated
explanations remain grounded in interpretable model evidence. The follow-
ing shows theLLMresponse to the prompt 1.
Listing 2: Report on Forest Management Capacity Ensemble Model Analysis
Introduction:
This report summarizes the findings of an ensemble model analysis
focused on forest management capacity (`capFMs`). The goal of the
analysis was to predictandunderstand the key drivers of`capFMs`
andidentify opportunitiesfor long-term decarbonization.
Model Performance:
The ensemble model achieved a high R2 score of 0.9439, indicating a
strong relationship between theinputfeaturesandthe outcome of`
capFMs`. The RMSE of 10159.99 hectares indicates that the modelis
able to accurately predict the`capFMs`values.
Top 3 Influential Features:
The SHAP analysis identified the top 3 features that influence`capFMs`
outcomes:
1. **year**: The year variable had a positive impact on`capFMs`, which
suggests thatastime progresses,`capFMs`isexpected to increase
. This could be due to advancementsintechnologyandimprovements
inforest management practices.
2. **Technology\_FM02\_TSA**: The Technology\_FM02\_TSA variable had a
positive impact on`capFMs`, indicating that the use of this
technology could lead to improvementsinforest management capacity
.
50
3. **CostInvLevel\_Slope**: The CostInvLevel\_Slope variable had a
negative impact on`capFMs`, suggesting that higher investment
costs may hinder the development of forest management capacity.
RegionalandPolicy Highlights:
The analysis identified the regionwiththe highest potentialfor`
capFMs`developmentasDE1. This highlights the importance of
investinginforest management capacityinthis region.
The leading growth technology was identifiedasFM02\_TSA, which could
be a valuable area of focusfor long-term decarbonization goals.
Recommendations:
Based on the findings of the analysis, we recommend the following
actions:
1. Investinthe regionwiththe highest potentialfor`capFMs`
development (DE1) to improve forest management capacity.
2. Focus on implementing the leading growth technology (FM02\_TSA) to
improve forest management capacityandsupportlong-term
decarbonization goals.
3. Consider reducing investment costs to improve`capFMs`outcomes.
Conclusion:
The ensemble model analysis identified key drivers of forest management
capacityandregionalandtechnological opportunitiesfor long-
term decarbonization. The recommendations outlinedinthis report
alignwiththese findingsandcouldhelpimprove forest management
capacityandsupportlong-term decarbonization goals.
Appendix .5.LLMoutputs in response of stack holder’s queries in subsection
5.4
Listing 3: Report on Forest Management Capacity Ensemble Model Analysis
Most similar scenarios: ('S06','S04')withcorrelation 1.0000
Least similar scenarios: ('S19','S17')withcorrelation 0.9997
51
Most similar scenarios: ('S09','S03')withcorrelation 1.0000
Least similar scenarios: ('S02','S01')withcorrelation 0.8805
Scenario Summary:
Matched parameter **CO2price** altered by **+20 %**.
Matched scenario(s): S06, S07, S08.
Cluster #1 -> contains 26 scenarios (average intra-cluster $\rho$ =
0.970).
OpenAI Response:
### Implications of a 20% Increase in CO2 Price
#### Summary of Change
The stakeholder has requested an analysis of what happensifthe CO2
price increases by 20%. This change corresponds to the parameter`
CO2price`and isrepresentedinthree scenarios: **S06**, **S07**,
and**S08**. These scenarios are part of a clusterwitha high
intra-cluster correlation (0.970), indicating that the outcomes
across these scenarios are highly similar.
---
### 1. **Overview of Affected Parameters in the Cluster**
The scenariosinthis cluster (Cluster ID: 1) are definedwiththe
following key parameters:
- **CO2price**: Increased by 20% (frombase value of 1.0 to 1.2)
- **FMsgrowth**: Varies between 1.0and1.2
- **BeechArea0**: Varies between 0.8and1.2
This variationinFMsgrowthandBeechArea0 reflects potential changes
inforest managementandland use practices, which can amplifyor
moderate the impact of the increased CO2 price.
---
### 2. **Key Impacts of the CO2 Price Increase**
#### a. **Emissions (GHG)**
- **General Trend**: A higher CO2 price generally encourages a shift
52
toward lower emissions,asit increases the cost of emitting CO2.
- **Cluster Implication**: Inallthree main scenarios (S06, S07, S08),
the CO2 priceisraised to 1.2, likely leading to a **reductionin
greenhouse gas emissions**, particularlyfromagricultureandland
use sectors.
- **Scenarios S06–S08** show slightly different valuesfor**FMsgrowth
**and**BeechArea0**, so emissions changes will vary slightly, but
allfollow the same general trend of **lower emissions** due to
the higher carbon cost.
#### b. **Land Use**
- **Forest ExpansionorConservation**: The parameter **BeechArea0**
indicates a potential expansion of beech forest areas. An increase
inCO2 price may incentivize more forested land, which increases
carbon sequestration.
- **Agricultural Land Use**: **FMsgrowth** reflects potential changes
inforest managementandland use intensity. Higher CO2 prices are
likely toreduceintensive agricultural land useinfavor of **more
sustainableandcarbon-friendly land use**.
#### c. **Costs**
- **Increased Cost of Emissions**: The higher CO2 price directly
increases the cost of emissionsinsectors suchasagricultureand
forestry.
- **Mitigation Investments**: Scenarios may reflect increased
investmentsincarbon sequestration, afforestation,orreduced
emissions practices, whichinturn **increase short-term costs**
but mayreduce long-term environmentalorregulatory risks.
#### d. **Agricultural and Forestry Management**
- **ShiftinAgricultural Practices**: A higher CO2 price may lead to a
**reductioninGHG-intensive agricultural practices**, suchas
peat extractionorintensive livestock production.
- **Forest Management**: The parameter **FMsgrowth** (forest management
growth rate) impacts forest carbon storage; higher values (as in
S07andS08) may imply better forest management, leading to **
higher carbon sequestration**.
53
---
### 3. **Most Closely Aligned Scenarios**
The following scenarios are most closely alignedwithS06, S07,andS08
due to their shared parameters:
- **S03**and**S04** (CO2price_0.8) — Lower CO2 price, so less impact,
but similar structure
- **S05** (CO2price_0.8, FMsgrowth_1.0, BeechArea0_1.0) — Similar
structure but lower CO2 price
- **S06** (CO2price_1.2, FMsgrowth_1.0, BeechArea0_1.2) — Base casefor
this analysis
- **S07** (CO2price_1.2, FMsgrowth_1.2, BeechArea0_0.8) — Higher forest
growth but lower beech area
- **S08** (CO2price_1.2, FMsgrowth_1.2, BeechArea0_1.2) — Highest
forest growthandbeech area
---
### 4. **Key Trends Across Cluster**
- **Reductioninemissions**: Due to higher costs of emissions.
- **Shift towards sustainable land use**: Expansion of forests (
especially beech),andreduced GHG-intensive agriculture.
- **Increased cost of carbon-intensive activities**: Especiallyin
agricultureandland use.
- **Enhanced forest management practices**: EspeciallyinS07andS08,
where FMsgrowthishigher.
---
### 5. **Recommendations for Stakeholders**
- **Policy Makers**: Consider a CO2 price increaseasa **cost-
effective tool** toreduceemissionsandpromote sustainable land
use.
- **Agricultural Sector**: Be preparedfor**higher costs** associated
withemissions, potentially necessitating a shift towards low-
54
emission practicesorcarbon offsetting.
- **Forestry Sector**: Opportunitiesfor**increased carbon
sequestration**andforest management investments due to higher CO2
pricing.
---
### Conclusion
A 20% increaseinCO2 price leads to **reduced emissions**, **shiftsin
land use toward forestedandsustainable practices**,and**higher
costsforcarbon-intensive activities**. The most closely aligned
scenarios (S06–S08) show strong consistencyinoutcomes,with**S08
** being the most ambitiousinterms of both forest growthandland
use change. This cluster supports the conclusion that a moderate
increaseinCO2 price can effectively drive sustainability
improvements across land useandemissions sectors.
Listing 4: Report on Forest Management Capacity Ensemble Model Analysis
Scenario Summary:
Matched parameter **costInvAgri** altered by **-20 %**.
Matched scenario(s): S11, S12.
Cluster #1 -> contains 26 scenarios (average intra-cluster $\rho$ =
0.970).
OpenAI Response:
### **Implications of a 20% Decrease in`costInvAgri`**
This scenario explores the consequences of a **20% reductioninthe
cost of investmentinagriculture (`costInvAgri`)**. This changeis
modeledin**Scenarios S11andS12**, which are part of a tightly
clusteredsetof scenarios (Cluster ID 1, intra-cluster correlation
= 0.970), indicating that they are highly similarinstructureand
behavior.
---
## **Key Implications of Lower`costInvAgri`**
55
### 1. **Investment and Agricultural Expansion**
- A lower investment costinagriculture makes it **more financially
attractive**forfarmersandagricultural investors to expandor
modernize farming practices.
- This may lead to:
- Increased agricultural land use (`Agriarea0`)
- Greater adoption of high-yieldfarming techniques
- Enhanced use of fertilizersormachinery (ascaptured by`
Agrigrowth`and`ghgAgri`)
### 2. **Higher Agricultural Emissions (`ghgAgri`)**
- As agricultural investment becomes cheaper, thereislikely an
increaseinagricultural activity (e.g., more landincultivation,
higher fertilizer use).
- This often leads to a **riseinagricultural greenhouse gas emissions
(`ghgAgri`)**, especiallyinscenarios like **S12**, where`
ghgAgri`isalso reduced to 0.8 (but still increasesfrombaseline
due to increased activity).
### 3. **Shift in Land Use**
- With agricultural expansion, **land use changes** are expectedinthe
agricultural sector.
- This may resultin:
- Increased pressure on natural ecosystems (e.g., peat extraction,
forest conversion)
- Changesin**BeechArea**, **PeatExtract**,andother land-use
indicators (asseeninsimilar scenarios)
### 4. **Economic and Cost Implications**
- Reduced`costInvAgri`implies that **agricultural investment becomes
more affordable**, which may:
- Drive lower overall costsinagricultural systems
- Influence the **cost of production**andprofitability
- Potentiallyreducethe **costMargAgri** (marginal cost of
agriculture)ifthe shiftissubstantial
---
## **Trends Across the Cluster (Cluster ID 1)**
56
The cluster includes scenarioswith**similar sensitivities to`
costInvAgri`**,andtrends across the scenarios show:
- **Positive feedback** between reduced`costInvAgri`andincreased`
Agrigrowth`,`Agriarea0`,and`ghgAgri`.
- Scenarioswith**lower`costInvAgri`** tend to **increase land-use
intensity**and**greenhouse gas emissions**fromagriculture.
- Many scenariosinthe cluster also adjust`costInvLevelAgri`, which
likely reinforces these trends.
### **Shared Scenario Patterns**
| Scenario |`costInvAgri`|`Agrigrowth`|`Agriarea0`|`ghgAgri`|
Notes |
|----------|----------------|---------------|--------------|------------|-------|
| S11 | 0.8 (-20%) | 0.8 | 0.8 | 0.8
| Balanced changesinagricultureandemissions |
| S12 | 0.8 | 0.8 | 0.8 | 0.8
| Similar to S11 |
| S13 | 1.2 (+20%) | 1.2 | 1.2 | 1.2
| Opposite direction |
| S10 | 0.5 | 0.5 | 0.5 | 0.5
| Low cost, low investment |
| S14 | 1.2 | 1.2 | 1.2 | 1.2
| High cost, high investment |
This indicates a **strong linearorproportional relationship** between
`costInvAgri`andagricultural system intensity.
---
## **Most Closely Aligned Scenarios**
The two main scenarios affected by a decreasein`costInvAgri`are:
- **S11**:`costInvAgri_0.8_costInvLevelAgri_0.8_Agrigrowth_0.8`
- **S12**:`costInvAgri_0.8_costInvLevelAgri_0.8_ghgAgri_0.8`
These are:
- Identicalin`costInvAgri`and`costInvLevelAgri`
- Slightly differentin`ghgAgri`, but both reflect the **same broad
57
changeinagricultural investment cost**
### Other similar scenarios in cluster:
- **S10** (`costInvAgri_0.5`) - even lower cost
- **S01**, **S02**, **S03**, **S04**, **S05** - also show similar
agricultural costandgrowth patterns
- **S22**, **S23**, **S24**, **S25**, **S26** - show increasing`
ghgAgri`withincreasing`costInvAgri`, suggesting a **positive
correlation** between costandemissions
---
## **Summary of Key Outcomes**
| Outcome | Impact |
|--------|--------|
| **Agricultural Investment** | Increased due to lower`costInvAgri`|
| **Land Use** | Expansion of`Agriarea0`likely |
| **Emissions** | Risein`ghgAgri`due to higher agricultural activity
|
| **Costs** | Lower marginalandinvestment costsinagriculture |
| **Correlation** | Strong positive correlationwith`Agrigrowth`and`
ghgAgri`across scenarios |
| **Aligned Scenarios** | **S11**and**S12** are most directly
affected,with**S10**and**S22–S26** showing related trends |
---
## **Recommendation for Stakeholders**
- If`costInvAgri`decreases, expect **higher agricultural productivity
**, **increased land use**,and**elevated emissions** unless
offset by policyortechnology changes.
- Monitor how changesin`costInvAgri`interactwith**carbon pricing**
or**peat extraction** policies,asthese also influence emissions
andland use.
- Consider aligning agricultural support policieswith**sustainability
goals** to mitigate unintended environmental consequences of low
investment costs.
58
Let me knowifyou'd like a visual interpretation (e.g., chart of
emissions vs. cost changes) or a comparison with the baseline
scenario (S09).
References
[1] A. Forootani, M. Tipaldi, R. Iervolino, S. Dey, Enhanced exploration
least-squares methods for optimal stopping problems, IEEE Control
Systems Letters 6 (2021) 271–276.
[2] M. Howells, H. Rogner, N. Strachan, C. Heaps, H. Huntington,
S. Kypreos, A. Hughes, S. Silveira, J. DeCarolis, M. Bazillian, et al.,
OSeMOSYS: the open source energy modeling system: an introduction
to its ethos, structure and development, Energy Policy 39 (2011) 5850–
5870.
[3] S. C. Bhattacharyya, Energy economics: concepts, issues, markets and
governance, Springer Nature, 2019.
[4] L. Laveneziana, M. Prussi, D. Chiaramonti, Critical review of energy
planning models for the sustainable development at company level, En-
ergy Strategy Reviews 49 (2023) 101136.
[5] A. S. Dagoumas, N. E. Koltsaklis, Review of models for integrating
renewable energy in the generation expansion planning, Applied Energy
242 (2019) 1573–1587.
[6] D. Connolly, H. Lund, B. V. Mathiesen, M. Leahy, A review of com-
puter tools for analysing the integration of renewable energy into various
energy systems, Applied energy 87 (2010) 1059–1082.
[7] H.-K. Ringkjøb, P. M. Haugan, I. M. Solbrekke, A review of modelling
tools for energy and electricity systems with large shares of variable
renewables, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 96 (2018) 440–
459.
[8] R. Loulou, U. Remme, A. Kanudia, A. Lehtila, G. Goldstein, Documen-
tation for the times model part II, Technical Report, 2005.
59
[9] D. Huppmann, O. Fricko, P. N. Kishimoto, V. Krey, K. Riahi, et al.,
The MESSAGEix integrated assessment model and the ix modeling
platform (ixmp): An open framework for integrated and cross-cutting
analysis of energy, climate, the environment, and sustainable devel-
opment, Environmental Modelling & Software 112 (2019) 143–156.
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.11.012.
[10] K. Löffler, K. Hainsch, T. Burandt, P. Oei, C. Kemfert,
C. von Hirschhausen, Designing a model for the global energy
system—GENeSYS-MOD: An application of the open-source energy
modeling system (OSeMOSYS), Energies 10 (2017) 1468. doi:10.3390/
en10101468.
[11] M.Barani, K.Löffler, P.C.delGranado, N.Moskalenko, E.Panos, F.M.
Hoffart, C. von Hirschhausen, M. Kannavou, H. Auer, K. Hainsch, et al.,
European Energy Vision 2060: Charting diverse pathways for Europe’s
energy transition, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12993 (2025).
[12] T. Brown, J. Hörsch, D. Schlachtberger, Pypsa: Python for power
system analysis, arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09913 (2017).
[13] M. Millinger, P. Tafarte, M. Jordan, F. Musonda, K. Chan, K. Meisel,
D. E. Aliabadi, A model for cost-and greenhouse gas optimal material
and energy allocation of biomass and hydrogen, SoftwareX 20 (2022)
101264.
[14] S. Pfenninger, B. Pickering, Calliope: a multi-scale energy systems
modelling framework, Journal of Open Source Software 3 (2018) 825.
[15] G. Vaidyanathan, Integrated assessment climate policy models have
proven useful, with caveats, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 118 (2021) e2101899118.
[16] B. Cointe, The ar6 scenario explorer and the history of ipcc scenarios
databases: evolutions and challenges for transparency, pluralism and
policy-relevance, npj Climate Action 3 (2024) 3.
[17] D. Huppmann, E. Kriegler, V. Krey, K. Riahi, J. Rogelj, K. Calvin,
F. Humpenoeder, A. Popp, S. K. Rose, J. Weyant, et al., Iamc 1.5 c
scenario explorer and data hosted by iiasa, (No Title) (2019).
60
[18] J. N. Rooney-Varga, F. Kapmeier, J. D. Sterman, A. P. Jones, M. Putko,
K. Rath, The climate action simulation, Simulation & Gaming 51 (2020)
114–140.
[19] B. van Ruijven, J. Min, The messageix-globiom model and scenarios for
transition risk analysis (2020).
[20] J. Rogelj, D. Shindell, K. Jiang, S. Fifita, P. Forster, V. Ginzburg,
C. Handa, H. Kheshgi, S. Kobayashi, E. Kriegler, et al., Mitigation
pathways compatible with 1.5 c in the context of sustainable develop-
ment, in: Global warming of 1.5 C, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, 2018, pp. 93–174.
[21] D. Klein, G. Luderer, E. Kriegler, J. Strefler, N. Bauer, M. Leimbach,
A. Popp, J. P. Dietrich, F. Humpenöder, H. Lotze-Campen, et al., The
value of bioenergy in low stabilization scenarios: an assessment using
remind-magpie, Climatic change 123 (2014) 705–718.
[22] R. Loulou, U. Remme, A. Kanudia, A. Lehtila, G. Goldstein, Documen-
tation for the times model part ii, Energy technology systems analysis
programme 384 (2005).
[23] H. McJeon, J. Edmonds, N. Bauer, L. Clarke, B. Fisher, B. P. Flannery,
J. Hilaire, V. Krey, G. Marangoni, R. Mi, et al., Limited impact on
decadal-scale climate change from increased use of natural gas, Nature
514 (2014) 482–485.
[24] W. Short, P. Sullivan, T. Mai, M. Mowers, C. Uriarte, N. Blair,
D. Heimiller, A. Martinez, Regional energy deployment system
(ReEDS), Technical Report, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL),
Golden, CO (United States), 2011.
[25] K. Löffler, K. Hainsch, T. Burandt, P.-Y. Oei, C. Kemfert,
C. Von Hirschhausen, Designing a model for the global energy
system—genesys-mod: an application of the open-source energy model-
ing system (osemosys), Energies 10 (2017) 1468.
[26] T. Brown, J. Hampp, F. Hofmann, J. Hörsch, M. Maria, F. Neumann,
et al., Pypsa-eur-sec: A sector-coupled open optimisation model of the
european energy system (2022).
61
[27] T. Brown, D. Schlachtberger, A. Kies, S. Schramm, M. Greiner, Syn-
ergies of sector coupling and transmission reinforcement in a cost-
optimised, highly renewable european energy system, Energy 160 (2018)
720–739.
[28] E. K. Gøtske, G. B. Andresen, F. Neumann, M. Victoria, Designing a
sector-coupled european energy system robust to 60 years of historical
weather data, Nature Communications 15 (2024) 1–12.
[29] J. F. Unnewehr, M. Schäfer, A. Weidlich, The value of network
resolution–a validation study of the european energy system model
pypsa-eur, in: 2022 Open Source Modelling and Simulation of Energy
Systems (OSMSES), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–7.
[30] P. Glaum, F. Neumann, T. Brown, Offshore power and hydrogen net-
works for europe’s north sea, Applied Energy 369 (2024) 123530.
[31] A. J. Conejo, X. Wu, Robust optimization in power systems: a tutorial
overview, Optimization and Engineering 23 (2022) 2051–2073.
[32] T. Qiu, B. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Dvorkin, D. S. Kirschen, Stochastic mul-
tistage coplanning of transmission expansion and energy storage, IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems 32 (2016) 643–651.
[33] A. Lorca, X. A. Sun, Multistage robust unit commitment with dynamic
uncertainty sets and energy storage, IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems 32 (2016) 1678–1688.
[34] S. Moret, F. Babonneau, M. Bierlaire, F. Maréchal, Decision support for
strategic energy planning: a complete robust optimization framework,
????
[35] C. Li, I. E. Grossmann, A review of stochastic programming methods for
optimizationofprocesssystemsunderuncertainty, FrontiersinChemical
Engineering 2 (2021) 622241.
[36] S. E. Kayacık, B. Basciftci, A. H. Schrotenboer, E. Ursavas, Partially
adaptive multistage stochastic programming, European Journal of Op-
erational Research 321 (2025) 192–207.
62
[37] S. Hilpert, C. Kaldemeyer, U. Krien, S. Günther, C. Wingenbach,
G. Plessmann, The open energy modelling framework (oemof)-a new
approach to facilitate open science in energy system modelling, Energy
strategy reviews 22 (2018) 16–25.
[38] M. G. Prina, B. Nastasi, D. Groppi, S. Misconel, D. A. Garcia, W. Spar-
ber, Comparison methods of energy system frameworks, models and
scenario results, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 167 (2022)
112719.
[39] S. Pfenninger, L. Hirth, I. Schlecht, E. Schmid, F. Wiese, T. Brown,
C. Davis, M. Gidden, H. Heinrichs, C. Heuberger, et al., Opening the
black box of energy modelling: Strategies and lessons learned, Energy
Strategy Reviews 19 (2018) 63–71.
[40] J. Göpfert, P. Kuckertz, J. M. Weinand, D. Stolten, Wiki-Quantities
and Wiki-Measurements: Datasets of quantities and their measurement
context from Wikipedia, Scientific Data 12 (2025) 1277.
[41] S. Pfenninger, A. Hawkes, J. Keirstead, Energy systems modeling for
twenty-first century energy challenges, Renewable and sustainable en-
ergy reviews 33 (2014) 74–86.
[42] J. Ramsebner, R. Haas, A. Ajanovic, M. Wietschel, The sector coupling
concept: A critical review, Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: energy and
environment 10 (2021) e396.
[43] Z. Yao, Y. Lum, A. Johnston, L. M. Mejia-Mendoza, X. Zhou, Y. Wen,
A. Aspuru-Guzik, E. H. Sargent, Z. W. Seh, Machine learning for a
sustainable energy future, Nature Reviews Materials 8 (2023) 202–215.
[44] B. Grillone, S. Danov, A. Sumper, J. Cipriano, G. Mor, A review of
deterministic and data-driven methods to quantify energy efficiency sav-
ings and to predict retrofitting scenarios in buildings, Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 131 (2020) 110027.
[45] S. Balduin, T. Westermann, E. Puiutta, Evaluating different machine
learning techniques as surrogate for low voltage grids, Energy Informat-
ics 3 (2020) 24.
63
[46] K. Menear, D. Duplyakin, M. C. Oliver, M. Shah, M. J. Martin, J. Mar-
tinek, K. Nithyanandam, Z. Ma, One System, Many Models: Designing
aSurrogateModelforSulfurThermalEnergyStorage, TechnicalReport,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO (United
States), 2023.
[47] F. Herbinger, C. Vandenhof, M. Kummert, Building energy model cal-
ibration using a surrogate neural network, Energy and buildings 289
(2023) 113057.
[48] K. Bamdad, M. E. Cholette, J. M. Bell, Building energy optimization
using surrogate model and active sampling, Journal of Building Perfor-
mance Simulation 13 (2020) 760–776.
[49] P. Ghafariasl, A. Mahmoudan, M. Mohammadi, A. Nazarparvar, S. Ho-
seinzadeh, M. Fathali, S. Chang, M. Zeinalnezhad, D. A. Garcia, Neural
network-basedsurrogatemodelingandoptimizationofamultigeneration
system, Applied Energy 364 (2024) 123130.
[50] M. G. Prina, M. Dallapiccola, D. Moser, W. Sparber, Machine learn-
ing as a surrogate model for energyplan: Speeding up energy system
optimization at the country level, Energy 307 (2024) 132735.
[51] A. J. Bogensperger, Y. Fabel, J. Ferstl, Accelerating energy-economic
simulation models via machine learning-based emulation and time series
aggregation, Energies 15 (2022) 1239.
[52] S. Mohammadi, V.-H. Bui, W. Su, B. Wang, Surrogate modeling for
solving opf: A review, Sustainability 16 (2024) 9851.
[53] H. Keramati, F. Hamdullahpur, Deep convolutional surrogates and free-
dom in thermal design, Energy and AI 13 (2023) 100248.
[54] T. Weber, A. Corotan, B. Hutchinson, B. Kravitz, R. Link, Deep learn-
ingforcreatingsurrogatemodelsofprecipitationinearthsystemmodels,
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 20 (2020) 2303–2317.
[55] S. Wasserkrug, L. Boussioux, D. Den Hertog, F. Mirzazadeh, Ş. I. Bir-
bil, J. Kurtz, D. Maragno, Enhancing decision making through the
64
integration of large language models and operations research optimiza-
tion, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 39, 2025, pp. 28643–28650.
[56] G. Buster, Large language models (llms) for energy systems research,
2023.
[57] J. Weers, S. Podgorny, N. Taverna, A. Anderson, S. Porse, G. Buster,
Empowering Geothermal Research: The Geothermal Data Repository’s
New AI Research Assistant, Technical Report, National Renewable En-
ergy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO (United States), 2024.
[58] G. Buster, P. Pinchuk, J. Barrons, R. McKeever, A. Levine, A. Lopez,
Supporting energy policy research with large language models: A case
study in wind energy siting ordinances, Energy and AI 18 (2024) 100431.
[59] P. Emami, Z. Li, R. Grout, Language Model Inventory v1. 0 [Slides],
Technical Report, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
Golden, CO (United States), 2023.
[60] A. Foucquier, S. Robert, F. Suard, L. Stéphan, A. Jay, State of the art
in building modelling and energy performances prediction: A review,
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 23 (2013) 272–288.
[61] Y. Bevis, G. Schaab, V. Rautenbach, S. Coetzee, Expert opinions on
using the third dimension to visualise wind speed uncertainty in wind
farm planning, International Journal of Cartography 3 (2017) 61–75.
[62] C. H. d. O. Fontes, F. G. M. Freires, et al., Sustainable and renewable
energy supply chain: A system dynamics overview, Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 82 (2018) 247–259.
[63] S. Bouckaert, A. F. Pales, C. McGlade, U. Remme, B. Wanner, L. Varro,
D. D’Ambrosio, T. Spencer, Net zero by 2050: A roadmap for the global
energy sector, 2021.
[64] A. L’Heureux, K. Grolinger, M. A. Capretz, Transformer-based model
for electrical load forecasting, Energies 15 (2022) 4993.
[65] C. A. Floudas, X. Lin, Mixed integer linear programming in process
scheduling: Modeling, algorithms, and applications, Annals of Opera-
tions Research 139 (2005) 131–162.
65
[66] A. Forootani, M. Tipaldi, M. G. Zarch, D. Liuzza, L. Glielmo, A least-
squares temporal difference based method for solving resource allocation
problems, IFAC Journal of Systems and Control 13 (2020) 100106.
[67] I. M. Sobol, Global sensitivity indices for nonlinear mathematical mod-
els and their monte carlo estimates, Mathematics and computers in
simulation 55 (2001) 271–280.
[68] M. D. McKay, R. J. Beckman, W. J. Conover, A comparison of three
methods for selecting values of input variables in the analysis of output
from a computer code, Technometrics 42 (2000) 55–61.
[69] A. K. Jain, R. P. W. Duin, J. Mao, Statistical pattern recognition: A
review, IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
22 (2000) 4–37.
[70] K. Pearson, Vii. note on regression and inheritance in the case of two
parents, proceedings of the royal society of London 58 (1895) 240–242.
[71] S. M. Lundberg, S.-I. Lee, A unified approach to interpreting model pre-
dictions, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[72] L. Breiman, Random forests, Machine learning 45 (2001) 5–32.
[73] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al.,
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python, the Journal of machine Learn-
ing research 12 (2011) 2825–2830.
[74] The integrated markal–efom system (times) model, IEA-ETSAP, 2016.
TIMES is a bottom-up, technology-rich model generator using LP over
medium-long horizons.
[75] Times (energy model), Wikipedia, 2025. TIMES succeeded MARKAL
in 2008; used in 177 institutions worldwide.
[76] Messageix documentation, MESSAGE-ix project (IIASA),
2025. Open-source Python/GAMS framework for en-
ergy–economy–environment modelling.
66
[77] Themessageixmodellingframework, OpenMODEInitiative/workshop,
2021. All contents are open-source and designed for integrated assess-
ment energy systems.
[78] T. Brown, J. Hörsch, D. Schlachtberger, PyPSA: Python for power
system analysis, arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09913 (2017).
[79] Pypsa, Wikipedia, 2025. Python library for power systems, supports
electricity, heating, transport, hydrogen; MILP framework.
[80] Z. R. Hopkins, M. Sun, J. C. DeWitt, D. R. Knappe, Recently detected
drinking water contaminants: Genx and other per-and polyfluoroalkyl
ether acids, Journal-American Water Works Association 110 (2018) 13–
28.
[81] J. Ho, J. Becker, M. Brown, P. Brown, I. Chernyakhovskiy, S. Cohen,
W. Cole, S. Corcoran, K. Eurek, W. Frazier, et al., Regional energy de-
ployment system (reeds) model documentation (version 2020), Technical
Report, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United
States), 2021.
[82] H.Lund, J.Z.Thellufsen, P.A.Østergaard, P.Sorknæs, I.R.Skov, B.V.
Mathiesen, EnergyPLAN–advanced analysis of smart energy systems,
Smart Energy 1 (2021) 100007.
[83] K. Calvin, P. Patel, L. Clarke, G. Asrar, B. Bond-Lamberty, R. Y. Cui,
A. Di Vittorio, K. Dorheim, J. Edmonds, C. Hartin, et al., GCAM v5.
1: representing the linkages between energy, water, land, climate, and
economic systems, Geoscientific Model Development 12 (2019) 677–698.
[84] Energy Exemplar LLC, Plexos: Energy market simulation software,
https://www.energyexemplar.com/plexos, 2025. Commercial, sup-
ports sub-hourly LP/MIP, zonal & nodal analysis across power, gas,
water, and renewables.
[85] J. Dorfner, urbs: A linear optimisation model for distributed energy
systems,https://github.com/tum-ens/urbs, 2023. Accessed: 2025-10-
10, release v1.0.1, GPL-3.0 license.
67