Fiber Bundle Networks:
A Geometric Machine Learning Paradigm
Dong Liu
liudong@mit.edu
Abstract
We propose Fiber Bundle Networks (FiberNet), a novel machine learning frame-
work integrating differential geometry with machine learning. Unlike traditional
deep neural networks relying on black-box function fitting, we reformulate classi-
fication as interpretable geometric optimization on fiber bundles, where categories
form the base space and wavelet-transformed features lie in the fibers above each
category. We introduce two innovations: (1) learnable Riemannian metrics identi-
fying important frequency feature components, (2) variational prototype optimiza-
tion through energy function minimization. Classification is performed via Voronoi
tessellation under the learned Riemannian metric, where each prototype defines a
decision region and test samples are assigned to the nearest prototype, providing
clear geometric interpretability. This work demonstrates that the integration of
fiber bundle with machine learning provides interpretability and efficiency, which
are difficult to obtain simultaneously in conventional deep learning.
Keywords:Fiber bundle, Riemannian metric, Variational Prototype Opti-
mization, Energy functional, Wavelet transform, Voronoi Cell
1 Introduction
Consider the task of distinguishing the sound of ocean waves from the sound of a chair
scraping against the floor. Ocean waves produce low-frequency periodic fluctuations (20-
500 Hz) that evolve slowly over several seconds. Chair scraping produces high-frequency
aperiodic noise (2000-8000 Hz) with sudden onsets. These two sounds have fundamental
differences in their frequency characteristics. But how can an algorithm automatically
learn that “low frequencies are more important for ocean waves” while “high frequencies
are more important for scraping sounds”? How can we leverage the semantic knowledge
that “ocean waves are similar to rain sounds but far from scraping sounds”?
Traditional deep learning implicitly learns these relationships through multi-layer
structures [1], and while powerful, they provide little insight into what has been learned or
1
arXiv:2512.01151v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
why it works [2, 3]. However, FiberNet explicitly models them through an interpretable
geometric framework: a learnable Riemannian metric adaptively weights the importance
of different frequency band features within categories, and a variational energy functional
naturally injects semantic structure between categories.
FiberNet can be used for various tasks such as audio classification, image classifica-
tion, text classification, gene sequence classification, etc. Correspondingly, different data
types require appropriate feature extraction methods: audio can use wavelet transforms
to capture time-frequency structure, images can use filters to extract multi-scale texture
features, text can use word embeddings to capture semantic relationships, and gene se-
quences can use fragment frequency statistics to extract sequence patterns. We use audio
classification as an example to introduce the classification mechanism of FiberNet.
The mainstream approach for audio classification is deep neural networks, such as
learning feature representations of spectrograms through convolutional layers [4]. Despite
the great success of deep learning, three key challenges remain: First, large-scale models
have enormous parameter counts (ResNet-18 has approximately 11M parameters, PANNs
has approximately 80M parameters [5]), making deployment on resource-constrained edge
devices (such as smart speakers and hearing aids) challenging. Second, the models are
black boxes, unable to explain why a certain sound is classified as “ocean waves” rather
than “rain”, which is a major obstacle in critical applications such as medical acoustic
diagnosis. Third, traditional cross-entropy loss functions ignore semantic relationships
between categories—“ocean waves” and “rain” are both natural sounds and should be
closer than “ocean waves” and “metal striking”, but cross-entropy treats all misclassifi-
cations equally.
We propose FiberNet, a geometric framework that makes these learning processes
explicit through fiber bundles. The core idea is: modeling classification as a geometric
optimization problem on fiber bundles. The category space is the base space, and all audio
features corresponding to each category lie in the fiber space [6]. This modeling explicitly
expresses the two-layer “category-feature” structure, allowing us to utilize geometric tools
(sections, Riemannian metrics) and variational optimization methods within the fiber
bundle framework.
FiberNet consists of three core components. First, a learnable diagonal Riemannian
metricG= diag(a 1, . . . , ad), where weightsai >0 adaptively reflect the discriminability of
each wavelet coefficient, reflecting the difference in the ability of different wavelet bases to
capture category information. Traditional Euclidean distance treats all frequency bands
equally [7], while in audio classification, the importance of different frequency bands varies
significantly—for example, ocean wave sounds mainly rely on low-frequency components
(50-500 Hz), while whistle sounds rely on high-frequency components (1000-4000 Hz).
Metric learning allows the algorithm to automatically identify important frequency bands,
reducing the influence of noise and irrelevant dimensions.
2
Second, variational optimization through energy minimization. Category prototypes
serve as “representative” features for samples of that class, defined on the fiber bundle
as the value of a section at the corresponding category, where the section is a mapping
from category space to feature space. We optimize category prototypes by minimizing
an energy functional. The energy includes three terms: attachment energy brings proto-
types close to training samples of their category (e.g., fitting within the “ocean waves”
class); tension energy encourages prototypes of semantically similar categories to be close
(e.g., “ocean waves-rain”); repulsion energy ensures sufficient separation between different
categories (e.g., “ocean waves-metal striking”).
Third, a classification strategy based on Voronoi partitioning. Finally, we trainNcat-
egory prototypes (Nis the total number of categories). During classification prediction,
we select the prototype with the smallest Riemannian distance. This process is equivalent
to the feature space being naturally partitioned intoNregions (Nis the total number of
categories) by the prototypes, and classification determines which Voronoi Cell centered
on a prototype a new sample belongs to.
Our main contributions are as follows: (a) In theoretical innovation, we propose the
novel machine learning paradigm of Fiber Bundle Networks, systematically applying fiber
bundle theory from differential geometry to machine learning classification problems for
the first time; (b) In interpretability, Riemannian metric weights reveal frequency band
feature importance, and energy minimization yields prototype configurations encoding
semantic relationships; (c) In algorithmic design, we propose a variational algorithm
for jointly optimizing metrics and prototypes, and prove its convergence and geometric
properties.
2 Related Work
Fiber bundles, as a core concept in differential geometry, have recently begun to be intro-
duced into machine learning and data analysis, but related work is still relatively scarce.
Courts and Kvinge (2021) [6] proposed Bundle Networks for exploring the fiber structure
of many-to-one mappings. The core idea is to use local trivialization to decompose the
space into the product of base space and fiber, thus naturally modeling the generative
process—given outputy, generate the set of inputsxsatisfyingf(x) =y(i.e., the fiber).
This work has a conceptual duality with the present paper: Bundle Networks focus on
the generative problem (diversity from output to input), while FiberNet focuses on its
inverse—the classification problem (mapping from input to output). Our section can
be viewed as selecting a representative point for each category, while Bundle Networks
focus on how to generate the entire fiber given a representative point. Both utilize the
local structure of fiber bundles, but with complementary optimization objectives: they
maximize generative diversity, we minimize classification uncertainty. The application of
3
geometric structures to machine learning has also been explored in other contexts, such
as Riemannian geometry for deep learning architectures [8] and manifold learning [9].
Scoccola and Perea (2022)’s [10] FibeRed algorithm uses vector bundles for dimensional-
ity reduction from the perspective of topological data analysis, modeling data as vector
bundles so that the base space captures large-scale topology while fibers capture local
geometry. This work shares with the present paper the use of fiber bundle hierarchical
structure to model complex data—the base space carries global information, fibers carry
local details. The difference is that FibeRed’s base space is the topological structure of
the data (discovered through topological inference), while FiberNet’s base space is the
category space, achieving classification by learning sections (mapping from categories to
features) and metrics (geometry of feature space).
3 FiberNet Mathematical Framework
3.1 Fiber Bundle Structure
We use the audio classification problem as an example to model the Fiber Bundle Network
algorithm. A fiber bundle is a geometric structure that naturally accommodates the
representation of categories, features, and their relationships. LetNbe the total number
of categories, the category set beC={c 1, c2, . . . , cN }, and the feature vector dimension
bed.
Definition 3.1(Classification Fiber Bundle).The fiber bundle for anN-class classifi-
cation problem is a triple(E, C, π), where:
•Base space: category setC
•FiberF c ={c} ×Rd: all “category-feature” pairs for categoryc, where the second
componentv∈R d is ad-dimensional feature vector
•Total spaceE=C×R d: the set of all “category-feature” pairs
•Projection mapπ:E →C,π(c, v) =c(extracting the category label)
This constitutes a trivial fiber bundle (E, C, π). A trivial bundle means that the feature
space structure is the same for all categories, all isomorphic toR d, allowing features of
different categories to be compared within a unified framework. For example, features
of “ocean waves” and features of “metal striking”, although belonging to different fibers,
can both compute distances under the same Riemannian metric.
For better geometric intuition, we can imagine the category spaceCas a line segment
or plane, with ad-dimensional fiber “column” “erected” above each categoryc∈C. The
total spaceEis the union of all these columns. An audio sample (c, v) corresponds to a
point on one of these columns.
4
3.2 Wavelet Feature Extraction
Audio signals are essentially non-stationary signals—their frequency characteristics evolve
over time. Understanding audio requires not only knowing “what frequencies appear” but
also “when they appear”. The Fourier transform only provides global frequency informa-
tion, completely losing time localization capability. The Short-Time Fourier Transform
(STFT) introduces time-frequency analysis but is limited by fixed windows, unable to
simultaneously achieve precise time and frequency localization. The wavelet transform
solves this dilemma through multi-scale adaptive analysis: low-frequency components use
long time windows to capture periodic structures, high-frequency components use short
windows to locate transient events. This makes wavelet transform a natural choice for
audio feature representation [11, 12].
Discrete Wavelet Transform
Given an audio signals(t) with sampling ratef s. According to the Nyquist theorem,
the frequency range contained in the signal is [0, f s/2]. The core idea of the Discrete
Wavelet Transform (DWT) is: repeatedly split the low-frequency part of the signal in
half, extracting frequency components layer by layer.
Layer 1 decomposition.Starting from the original signalS, we use a pair of filters
(low-pass filter and high-pass filter) to split the signal into two parts:
A1 : Approximation coefficients (low-frequency part), frequency range [0, fs/4],(1)
D1 : Detail coefficients (high-frequency part), frequency range [f s/4, fs/2].(2)
D1 captures the fastest changes in the signal, such as high-frequency noise.A 1 preserves
relatively slow changes but still contains mid-low frequency information and needs further
decomposition.
Layer 2 decomposition.Next, we retainD 1 (no further processing) and continue
decomposingA 1. We treatA 1 as a new “signal” and decompose it again using low-
pass/high-pass filters:
A1 →



A2 : Lower frequency part, frequency range [0, fs/8]
D2 : Mid frequency part, frequency range [f s/8, fs/4].
(3)
Note the change in frequency range. Original signal [0, fs/2]. After layer 1 decomposition,
A1 only contains [0, fs/4] (frequency range halved). After layer 2 decomposition,A 2 only
contains [0, fs/8] (frequency range halved again).
Repeat to layerLdecomposition.Continue this process: each time decompose
the current approximation coefficientsA ℓ−1 to obtain newA ℓ andD ℓ. The recursive
5
formula is:
Aℓ−1 →



Aℓ : frequency range [0, fs/2ℓ+1]
Dℓ : frequency range [fs/2ℓ+1, fs/2ℓ].
(4)
AfterLlayers of decomposition, the original signal is completely decomposed as:
S=A L +D L +D L−1 +···+D 2 +D 1 =A L +
LX
ℓ=1
Dℓ.(5)
The entire wavelet decomposition process forms a binary tree, with each node representing
a frequency band (see Figure 1):
Figure 1: Wavelet decomposition binary tree structure. Each decomposition layer halves
the frequency range, extracting frequency components from high to low. The leaf nodes
{D1, D2, . . . , DL, AL}form the finalL+ 1 frequency bands.
Therefore, we can see that with each layer of wavelet transform decomposition, the
6
frequency range halves ([0, fs/2ℓ]→[0, f s/2ℓ+1]). The “leaf nodes” of the tree are the
final retained frequency components{D 1, D2, . . . , DL, AL}, a total ofL+ 1 frequency
bands, arranged from high to low.
The essence of wavelet transform multi-resolution analysis.This layer-by-
layer decomposition achieves adaptive time-frequency trade-off, thus possessing two ad-
vantages that the Short-Time Fourier Transform cannot simultaneously have. (a) Precise
time localization: High-frequency components (such asD 1, D2) correspond to short time
windows, allowing precise time localization, thus suitable for capturing transient events
(such as strikes, explosions); (b) Precise frequency resolution: Low-frequency compo-
nents correspond to long windows, covering narrow frequency bands (e.g.,A L only covers
[0, fs/2L+1], with bandwidth much narrower than [f s/4, fs/2] covered byD 1), enabling
precise distinction of nearby frequencies, suitable for capturing periodic structures (such
as ocean wave sounds, engine sounds). Therefore, this adaptive long-short window mech-
anism allows wavelet transform to balance precise localization in both time and frequency,
which is exactly what the Short-Time Fourier Transform’s fixed window cannot achieve.
Orthogonal wavelet basis.We choose orthogonal wavelet bases (such as Daubechies
wavelets [13]) for decomposition, which are implemented through a pair of orthogonal
low-pass/high-pass filters, ensuring orthogonality between frequency bands:
⟨Di, Dj⟩= 0 (i̸=j),⟨A L, Di⟩= 0∀i.(6)
This property is crucial, meaning that information in different frequency bands is ap-
proximately decoupled, providing a theoretical basis for subsequent diagonal Riemannian
metric learning. Due to orthogonality between frequency bands, we can independently
assign weightsa i to each frequency band (reflecting its importance for classification)
without considering complex coupling between frequency bands—otherwise, a full metric
matrix would be needed, requiringO(d 2) parameters; whereas a diagonal metric only
needsdparameters, significantly reducing the number of training parameters.
Energy conservation.By Parseval’s theorem, the total energy of the signal is
preserved in the wavelet domain:
∥S∥2 =∥A L∥2 +
LX
ℓ=1
∥Dℓ∥2.(7)
The energy distribution ∥AL∥2
∥S∥2 , ∥DL∥2
∥S∥2 , . . . ,∥D1∥2
∥S∥2 is the frequency characteristic fingerprint
of sound categories.
Feature vector construction.Utilizing the sparsity of audio signals in the wavelet
domain (energy concentrated in a few coefficients, most coefficients close to zero), we
retain the topklargest energy coefficients from each frequency band, capturing the main
7
energy distribution characteristics of that frequency segment. Concatenating yields a
fixed-dimension feature vector:
v= [A (1:k)
L , D(1:k)
L , . . . , D(1:k)
1 ]∈R d, d= (L+ 1)·k.(8)
The key requirement here is consistency, i.e., all audio uses the same wavelet basis,
decomposition layers, and coefficient retention strategy, ensuring that each dimension of
the feature vectorvhas the same physical meaning. For example, the firstkdimensions
of each sample’s feature vector always correspond to the main energy components of the
lowest frequency band, facilitating cross-sample comparison.
Role of wavelet transform in fiber bundles.The wavelet transform defines a
mapping from time-domain signal space to feature space:
Φ :s(t)7→v∈R d.(9)
In the fiber bundle framework (Section 3.1), labeled training samples (c, s) are mapped
to points in the total spaceE:
(c, s)7→(c,Φ(s)) = (c, v)∈ E=C×R d.(10)
Since audio of the same class has similar physical production mechanisms, their frequency
energy distribution patterns are also similar. For example, ocean wave sounds all come
from periodic motion and collision of water bodies, with energy concentrated in low-
frequency bands; metal strikes are all solid transient collisions, with energy distributed
in high-frequency bands. This physical similarity is reflected in the wavelet domain as:
wavelet coefficient energy distributions between same-class audio are more similar than
different-class audio, and extracted feature vectors are closer. Additionally, orthogonality
between subbands allows the diagonal Riemannian metric (Section 3.3) to independently
adjust the contribution of each frequency band.
The training set is finally represented asD={(c 1, v1), . . . ,(cM , vM )}, wherev i ∈R d
is a wavelet feature vector andc i ∈Cis a category label. The next section will define a
learnable Riemannian metric on this feature space.
3.3 Riemannian Metric
We define a diagonal Riemannian metric in the fiber direction (feature spaceR d) of the
fiber bundle, represented by the metric tensorG= diag(a 1, . . . , ad), wherea i >0 is the
weight for thei-th feature dimension (corresponding to a coefficient of some frequency
8
band). The Riemannian distance between two feature vectorsv 1, v2 ∈R d is:
dG(v1, v2) =
vuut
dX
i=1
ai(v1,i −v 2,i)2 (11)
This formulation is related to Mahalanobis distance [14] but with learnable diagonal
structure.
The diagonal form has advantages in three aspects: parameter efficiency, interpretabil-
ity, and theoretical foundation. First, it only requiresdparameters, far fewer than the
d(d+1)/2 parameters of a full metric tensor (whend= 250, reduced from 31,375 to 250).
Second, each weighta i directly corresponds to the importance of a frequency band coeffi-
cient, i.e., largea i means that dimension contributes significantly to classification. Third,
orthogonality between wavelet subbands ensures independence of feature dimensions, and
the diagonal metric is sufficient to capture the main geometric structure.
To ensure positive definiteness of the metric (a i >0), we adopt exponential repa-
rameterizationa i = exp(θi), whereθ i ∈R d is an unconstrained real parameter. During
optimization, we perform gradient descent directly onθ, automatically satisfying the
positive definiteness constraint. Initializationθ= 0 corresponds to Euclidean metric
(ai = 1).
3.4 Sections and Prototypes
The section is a core concept in fiber bundle geometry, providing a mathematical frame-
work for systematically selecting representative points in the fiber of each category.
Definition 3.2(Section).A section is a maps:C→ Esatisfying the composition
conditionπ◦s=id C, i.e., for each categoryc∈C, the value of the section atc, denoted
s(c), must belong to the corresponding fiberF c ={c} ×Rd.
Since the total spaceE=C×R d is the direct product of category space and feature
space, the value of the section can be written ass(c) = (c, vc), wherev c ∈R d. To simplify
notation, we equivalently represent the section as a maps:C→R d, wheres(c) =v c is
the prototype feature vector for categoryc.
Geometrically, one can imagine a set of vertical fiber “columns” stacked above the
category space, with the section selecting a representative point (prototype) on each col-
umn. The configuration formed by these prototypes should reflect the semantic relation-
ships of categories: prototypes of semantically similar categories (such as “ocean waves”
and “rain”) should be close, and prototypes of semantically different categories (such as
“ocean waves” and “metal striking”) should be distant. A good section is “smooth”, not
jumping dramatically between semantically similar categories.
9
The section is determined byN d-dimensional vectors{s(c 1), . . . , s(cN )}, totaling
N×dparameters. Each prototype is initialized as the mean of training samples of that
category:
s(c) = 1
|Dc|
X
vi:ci=c
vi.(12)
For example, for a dataset with 50 classes and dimension 250, the section is 50 vectors
of 250 dimensions, each vector representing the corresponding category. A good section
should satisfy:d G(s(“sea waves”), s(“rain”)) is small, whiledG(s(“sea waves”), s(“metal striking”))
is large. This geometric configuration conforming to semantic intuition will be automat-
ically achieved through energy functional optimization in the next section.
3.5 Variational Energy Functional
The section is optimized by minimizing an energy functional. The energy design is based
on variational principles [15], balancing three objectives:
E[s] =E attachment[s] +λ 1Etension[s] +λ 2Erepulsion[s].(13)
The first term is the attachment energy, defined as:
Eattachment[s] = 1
M
MX
i=1
d2
G(vi, s(ci)).(14)
It ensures that each prototype is close to the training samples of its category. One can
imagine training samples connected to the corresponding prototype through “springs”,
with the attachment energy being the sum of all spring potential energies, where the
spring stiffness coefficient is determined by the metricG. Taking the “ocean waves”
category as an example, all ocean wave sound samples{v i :c i = sea waves}“pull” the
prototypes(sea waves) toward their average position, and the metricG’s weights{a i}
determine the relative strength of different frequency bands in this “pulling force”.
The second term is the tension energy, defined as:
Etension[s] =
X
(ci,cj)∈Esem
wijd2
G(s(ci), s(cj)).(15)
It encourages prototypes of semantically similar categories to be close. HereE sem is the
adjacency relation set, andw ij are edge weights. Adjacency relations are determined
through semantic similarity of category names: first, use a word embedding model [16]
to convert each category name to a vector embc, then calculate cosine similarity between
10
any two categories:
sim(ci, cj) = embT
ciembcj
∥embci∥∥embcj ∥.(16)
For each category, we select theKcategories with highest similarity (typicallyKis 2 or
3) as neighbors, forming the adjacency graphE sem. Edge weights are obtained through
normalized similarity:
wij = sim(ci, cj)P
ck∈N(ci) sim(ci, ck).(17)
whereN(c i) is the neighbor set ofc i. For example, neighbors of “chair creaking” are
“door creak” (weight 0.5), “wood creak” (weight 0.3), “floor creak” (weight 0.2), all
household creaking sounds.
The tension energy has a clear geometric-physical interpretation. From a physical per-
spective, prototypes are like mass points on a spring network, with semantically similar
prototypes (such as “rain-stream sound”) connected by strong springs (largew ij), and
minimizing total potential energy brings similar prototypes together. From a geomet-
ric perspective, tension energy corresponds to discrete Dirichlet energy [17], encouraging
smooth variation of the section between semantically similar categories, which is con-
sistent with classical principles in variational calculus, where the energy minimization
process makes the solution tend toward smoothness.
The third term is the repulsion energy, defined as:
Erepulsion[s] =
X
i̸=j
max (0,margin−d G(s(ci), s(cj)))2 .(18)
It penalizes prototypes that are too close (less than margin), like repulsive force between
charged particles, ensuring different categories maintain separation in feature space.
The three energy terms form a balance: attachment energy is an “internal force”,
acting within the same category, bringing prototypes close to same-class samples; tension
energy is an “external local force”, only acting on semantically adjacent categories, pulling
similar prototypes together; repulsion energy is an “external global force”, acting on all
category prototype pairs, pushing them apart. Even if “ocean waves” and “rain” are
semantically similar, repulsion energy still ensures they maintain at least margin distance,
avoiding classification confusion.
Hyperparametersλ 1 andλ 2 control this balance: largeλ 1 makes the section smoother
(semantic clustering more evident); largeλ 2 makes decision boundaries wider (category
separation clearer).
Energy Minimization.The optimal sections ∗ is obtained by minimizing the energy
functional:
s∗ = arg min
s
E[s].(19)
11
With fixed metricG,s ∗ satisfies the variational condition:
δE
δs = 0.(20)
In the discrete case, this is equivalent to: for each categoryc∈C,
∂E
∂s(c) = 0.(21)
This corresponds to a stable equilibrium state in mechanics: attachment force (pulling
prototypes toward samples), tension (pulling semantically similar prototypes together),
and repulsion force (pushing all prototypes apart) reach dynamic balance.
3.6 Unified Optimization Framework for Energy Minimization
We jointly optimize the sectionsand metricGthrough a unified energy functional:
min
s,G
E[s, G(θ)] = min
s,G
Eattachment[s, G] +λ1Etension[s, G] +λ2Erepulsion[s, G],(22)
wheres= (s(c 1), . . . , s(cN )) is the prototype configuration,θ= (θ 1, . . . , θd)∈R d is the
metric parameter, andG= diag(exp(θ 1), . . . ,exp(θd)).
Metric weights are automatically learned through energy minimization, without re-
quiring additional loss functions. The three components of the energy functional embody
the key mechanisms of metric learning: attachment energy automatically reduces weights
of dimensions with large intra-class variance and increases weights of dimensions with high
intra-class consistency by minimizing weighted intra-class distance; tension energy fur-
ther encourages semantically similar categories to be close on key dimensions, reinforcing
semantic structure; repulsion energy increases weights of dimensions that can effectively
distinguish different categories, ensuring clear classification boundaries. The three work
synergistically to automatically discover frequency band combinations most useful for
classification.
The optimal solution (s ∗, G∗) satisfies the variational condition:
∂E
∂s(c) = 0,∀c∈C; ∂E
∂θi
= 0,∀i= 1, . . . , d.(23)
From a physical perspective, this corresponds to a stable equilibrium state of the system:
for the prototype configuration, attachment force, tension, and repulsion force reach dy-
namic balance at each prototype; for metric weights, the importance of different frequency
bands reaches optimal allocation, minimizing total energy.
The core advantage of this unified framework is: metrics and prototypes are jointly
optimized through the same objective, mutually adapting. The metric shapes the geo-
12
metric structure of the feature space, guiding the configuration of prototypes; conversely,
the distribution of prototypes influences metric learning. This avoids the complexity of
multi-objective trade-offs in traditional metric learning methods while providing clear
geometric interpretation.
4 Algorithm Design
This section introduces the algorithm for solving the optimization problem in Section 3.
We adopt an alternating optimization strategy: fix metricGto optimize sections, then
fix sectionsto optimize metric parameterθ, iterating until convergence [18]. Convergence
analysis of alternating optimization is in Appendix A.
4.1 Alternating Optimization
The main loop of the algorithm contains two alternating steps. In thet-th iteration, we
first fix metricG (t) and update sections (t+1) through gradient descent to reduce energy
E[s, G(t)]; then fix sections (t+1) and update metric parameterθ (t+1) through gradient
descent to reduce energyE[s (t+1), G(θ)].
Initialization is crucial for convergence speed and solution quality. We initialize each
prototype as the mean of training samples of the corresponding category:s (0)(c) =
1
|Dc|
P
vi∈Dc vi, providing a reasonable starting point. Metric parameters are initialized
asθ (0) = 0, corresponding to Euclidean metric (a i = 1), starting optimization from fair
geometry and gradually discovering important frequency bands.
4.2 Convergence Criteria
The algorithm terminates when any of the following conditions is met: maximum number
of iterationsT max is reached (e.g., 100 iterations); energy change is less than thresholdϵ
(e.g.,|E (t+1) −E (t)|<10 −4).
4.3 Classification Inference
After training is complete, we obtain the optimal prototype configurations∗ ={s ∗(c1), . . . ,
s∗(cN )}and optimal metricG ∗. For a new test sample, first extract wavelet features
vtest = Φ(stest), then calculate its Riemannian distance to all prototypesd G∗ (vtest, s∗(ci)),
and predict the category as the nearest prototype:
ˆc= arg min
c∈C
dG∗ (vtest, s∗(c)).(24)
13
This is a prototype-based nearest neighbor classifier [19], but both the metric and
prototypes have undergone geometric optimization. From a geometric perspective, this
corresponds to Voronoi partitioning of the feature space under Riemannian metricG ∗,
with each prototype defining a Voronoi cell (decision region) [20].
4.4 Algorithm Pseudocode
For ease of understanding and implementation, Algorithm 1 provides complete pseu-
docode for FiberNet, including preprocessing, alternating optimization, and inference
stages.
Algorithm 1FiberNet: Classification via Fiber Bundle
Require:Training setD={(c i, si)}M
i=1, hyperparametersλ 1, λ2, K,margin
Ensure:Optimal prototypess ∗, optimal metricG ∗, class prediction ˆc
1:Extract wavelet features:v i ←Φ(s i),∀i
2:Build adjacency graphEfrom class name embeddings (top-Kneighbors)
3:Initialize:s (0)(c)←class mean,θ (0) ←0,G (0) ←I
4:fort= 0 toT max −1do
5:FixG (t), updates (t+1) by gradient descent onE[s, G(t)]
6:whereE=E att +λ 1Eten +λ 2Erep
7:Fixs (t+1), updateθ (t+1) by gradient descent onE[s (t+1), G(θ)]
8:G (t+1) ←diag(exp(θ (t+1)))
9:if|E (t+1) −E (t)|< ϵthen
10:break
11:end if
12:end for
13:returns ∗ ←s (T) ,G ∗ ←G (T)
14:Inference:For test samples test, predict ˆc←arg minc dG∗ (Φ(stest), s∗(c))
5 Discussion
This paper proposes FiberNet, an audio classification framework based on fiber bundle
geometry. Our core contribution is reformulating the classification problem as variational
optimization on fiber bundles: sections:C→R d maps category space to feature
space, Riemannian metricGdefines the geometric structure of feature space, and a
unified energy functionalE[s, G] optimizes both simultaneously. The key insight of this
geometric perspective is that metrics and prototypes should be learned collaboratively—
traditional methods seek prototypes in fixed Euclidean space, while we allow the space
itself to “bend” to fit the data. Attachment energy, tension energy, and repulsion energy
14
correspond to data fitting, semantic smoothness, and category separation respectively,
unified naturally through variational principles without manually balancing multiple loss
functions. We prove convergence of the alternating optimization algorithm: the energy
sequence monotonically decreases and converges. This convergence guarantee is based on
good mathematical properties of the energy—attachment and tension energies are convex
or log-convex with respect to subproblems, repulsion energy is non-convex but bounded,
and overall energy is non-negative and lower bounded. From a broader perspective,
FiberNet, inspired by fiber bundles and using energy functional minimization as a tool,
establishes a new machine learning paradigm, providing new perspectives and tools for
classification problems.
References
[1] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton. Deep learning.Nature, 521(7553):436–444,
2015.
[2] Y. Zhang, P. Tiˇ no, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang. A survey on neural network inter-
pretability.IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence,
5(5):726–742, 2021.
[3] Z. C. Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept
of interpretability is both important and slippery.Queue, 16(3):31–57, 2018.
[4] S. Abdoli, P. Cardinal, and A. L. Koerich. End-to-end environmental sound classi-
fication using a 1d convolutional neural network.Expert Systems with Applications,
136:252–263, 2019.
[5] Q. Kong, Y. Cao, T. Iqbal, Y. Wang, W. Wang, and M. D. Plumbley. Panns: Large-
scale pretrained audio neural networks for audio pattern recognition. InIEEE/ACM
Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, volume 28, pages 2880–
2894, 2020.
[6] N. Courts and H. Kvinge. Bundle networks: Fiber bundles, local trivializa-
tions, and a generative approach to exploring many-to-one maps. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.06983, 2021.
[7] C. Scarvelis and J. Solomon. Riemannian metric learning via optimal transport. In
International Conference on Learning Representations. OpenReview, May 2023.
[8] X. Pennec, P. Fillard, and N. Ayache. A riemannian framework for tensor computing.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 66(1):41–66, 2006.
15
[9] J. B. Tenenbaum, V. Silva, and J. C. Langford. A global geometric framework for
nonlinear dimensionality reduction.Science, 290(5500):2319–2323, 2000.
[10] L. Scoccola and J. A. Perea. Fibered: Fiberwise dimensionality reduction of topo-
logically complex data with vector bundles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06513, 2022.
[11] S. Waldekar and G. Saha. Analysis and classification of acoustic scenes with
wavelet transform-based mel-scaled features.Multimedia Tools and Applications,
79(11):7911–7926, 2020.
[12] S. G. Mallat. A theory for multiresolution signal decomposition: the wavelet rep-
resentation.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
11(7):674–693, 1989.
[13] I. Daubechies.Ten lectures on wavelets. SIAM, 1992.
[14] P. C. Mahalanobis. On the generalized distance in statistics.Proceedings of the
National Institute of Sciences of India, 2(1):49–55, 1936.
[15] R. Courant and D. Hilbert.Methods of mathematical physics, volume I. John Wiley
& Sons, 1989.
[16] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean. Efficient estimation of word repre-
sentations in vector space.arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013.
[17] U. Pinkall and K. Polthier. Computing discrete minimal surfaces and their conju-
gates.Experimental Mathematics, 2(1):15–36, 1993.
[18] J. C. Bezdek and R. J. Hathaway. Convergence of alternating optimization.Neural,
Parallel & Scientific Computations, 11(4):351–368, 2003.
[19] T. Cover and P. Hart. Nearest neighbor pattern classification.IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, 13(1):21–27, 1967.
[20] F. Aurenhammer, R. Klein, and D. T. Lee.Voronoi diagrams and Delaunay trian-
gulations. World Scientific Publishing Company, 2013.
[21] W. Rudin.Principles of mathematical analysis. McGraw-Hill, 3rd edition, 1976.
A Convergence Proof for Alternating Optimization
Lemma A.1(Energy Monotone Decrease).The energy sequence{E (t)}∞
t=0 generated by
the alternating optimization algorithm satisfies:
E(t+1) ≤E (t),∀t≥0.(25)
16
Proof.In thet-th iteration:
FixG (t), minimizeE[s, G(t)] through gradient descent to obtains (t+1):
E[s(t+1), G(t)]≤E[s (t), G(t)].(26)
Fixs (t+1), minimizeE[s (t+1), G] through gradient descent to obtainG(t+1):
E[s(t+1), G(t+1)]≤E[s (t+1), G(t)].(27)
Combining the two steps:
E(t+1) =E[s (t+1), G(t+1)]≤E[s (t+1), G(t)]≤E[s (t), G(t)] =E (t).(28)
Therefore the energy sequence monotonically decreases.
Lemma A.2(Energy Lower Bound).The energy functional satisfiesE[s, G]≥0for all
(s, G).
Proof.The energy functional consists of three terms:
(1) Attachment energy:
Eatt = 1
M
MX
i=1
d2
G(vi, s(ci)) = 1
M
MX
i=1
dX
j=1
aj(vi,j −s(c i)j)2 ≥0,(29)
becausea j = exp(θj)>0 and squared terms are non-negative.
(2) Tension energy:
Eten =
X
(i,j)∈E
wijd2
G(s(ci), s(cj))≥0,(30)
becausew ij ≥0 (normalized similarity) and distance squared is non-negative.
(3) Repulsion energy:
Erep =
X
i̸=j
max(0,margin−d G(s(ci), s(cj)))2 ≥0,(31)
because max(0,·) 2 ≥0.
Therefore:
E=E att +λ 1Eten +λ 2Erep ≥0.(32)
Theorem A.1(Energy Sequence Convergence).The energy sequence{E (t)}generated
17
by the alternating optimization algorithm converges, i.e., there existsE ∗ ≥0such that:
lim
t→∞
E(t) =E ∗.(33)
Proof.By Lemma A.1,{E (t)}is monotonically decreasing. By Lemma A.2,E (t) ≥0 for
allt.
According to the Monotone Convergence Theorem [21]: a monotonically decreasing
sequence with a lower bound must converg0e.
Therefore limt→∞ E(t) =E ∗ exists andE ∗ ≥0.
18