1
Sum Rate Maximization in STAR-RIS-UA V-Assisted
Networks: A CA-DDPG Approach for Joint Optimization
Yujie Huang, Haibin Wan, Xiangcheng Li, Tuanfa Qin, Yun Li,Member, IEEE, Jun Li,Fellow, IEEE, and Wen
Chen,Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—With the rapid advances in programmable ma-
terials, reconfigurable intelligent surfaces (RIS) have become
a pivotal technology for future wireless communications. The
simultaneous transmitting and reflecting reconfigurable intelli-
gent surfaces (STAR-RIS) can both transmit and reflect signals,
enabling comprehensive signal control and expanding application
scenarios. This paper introduces an unmanned aerial vehicle
(UA V) to further enhance system flexibility and proposes an
optimization design for the spectrum efficiency of the STAR-RIS-
UA V-assisted wireless communication system. We present a deep
reinforcement learning (DRL) algorithm capable of iteratively
optimizing beamforming, phase shifts, and UA V positioning to
maximize the systems sum rate through continuous interactions
with the environment. To improve exploration in deterministic
policies, we introduce a stochastic perturbation factor, which
enhances exploration capabilities. As exploration is strengthened,
the algorithms ability to accurately evaluate the state-action value
function becomes critical. Thus, based on the deep deterministic
policy gradient (DDPG) algorithm, we propose a convolution-
augmented deep deterministic policy gradient (CA-DDPG) algo-
rithm that balances exploration and evaluation to improve the
systems sum rate. The simulation results demonstrate that the
CA-DDPG algorithm effectively interacts with the environment,
optimizing the beamforming matrix, phase shift matrix, and UA V
location, thereby improving system capacity and achieving better
performance than other algorithms.
Index Terms—Reconfigurable intelligent surface, Unmanned
aerial vehicle, Deep reinforcement learning, Convolutional neural
network, Beamforming.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N recent years, with the widespread deployment of the
fifth-generation (5G) mobile communication networks and
the continuous advancement of related software and hardware
technologies, 5G has been able to provide users with higher
reliability, enhanced security, faster data transmission speeds,
and lower latency. Meanwhile, the growing demand for com-
munication between various devices has further driven the
development of 5G, while also placing higher demands on
the future of wireless communications [1–5].
Yujie Huang is with the School of Computer and Electronic Information,
Guangxi University, Nanning, China (e-mail: 2313391011@st.gxu.edu.cn).
Haibin Wan is with the School of Computer and Electronic Information,
Guangxi University, Nanning, China (e-mail: hbwan@gxu.edu.cn).
Xiangcheng Li is with the School of Computer and Electronic Information,
Guangxi University, Nanning, China (e-mail: xcli@gxu.edu.cn).
Tuanfa Qin is with the School of Computer and Electronic Information,
Guangxi University, Nanning, China (e-mail: tfqin@gxu.edu.cn).
Yun Li is with the College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Zhejiang
A&F University, Hangzhou, China (e-mail: liyun@zafu.edu.cn).
Jun Li is with the School of Information Science and Engineering, Southeast
University, Nanjing, China (e-mail: jun.li@seu.edu.cn).
Wen Chen is with the Department of Electronic Engineering Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail: wenchen@sjtu.edu.cn).
As the successor to 5G, the sixth-generation (6G) mobile
communication network is expected to achieve higher data
rates, expanded coverage, and robust security. However, the
continuous advancement of wireless communication has led
to the use of increasingly higher transmission frequencies,
inevitably introducing inherent challenges such as suscepti-
bility to interference, reduced coverage, weakened penetration
capability, and related issues. Moreover, the explosive growth
in data volume and the increasing complexity of hardware
devices have created significant cost challenges. These issues
present a critical dilemma for the future development of
wireless communication: how to enhance system performance
while minimizing costs and resource consumption has become
one of the core problems requiring urgent resolution [6–9].
Benefiting from collaborative advancements across multiple
disciplines, the challenge of high-frequency signal blockage
by large obstacles has been effectively mitigated through the
advent of RIS [10]. RIS employs a class of metamaterials
termed “information metamaterials”, comprising a planar array
of passive electromagnetic reflective elements that are dynam-
ically controlled via software or hardware configurations. The
core functionality of RIS lies in dynamically adjusting the
reflection phase shifts and amplitudes of incident signals to
steer directional beams [11]. By harnessing real-time channel
state information (CSI) from signal propagation feedback, RIS
enables adaptive wireless environment reconfiguration through
software-defined control. This not only introduces new spatial
degrees of freedom to enhance link performance but also
lays the foundation for intelligent and programmable radio
environments [12]. Beyond signal reflection capabilities, RIS
is characterized by its compact form factor and low cost,
which significantly simplifies the deployment of communica-
tion infrastructure. These advantages enable RIS to be flexibly
installed on building exteriors, indoor walls, vehicles, UA Vs,
and virtually any location due to its miniaturized design.
Furthermore, the cost-effectiveness of RIS enables large-scale
deployment without incurring prohibitive expenses [13].
The proposal of STAR-RIS represents an expansion in the
spatial dimension. Compared with reflective RIS, this form
not only retains the signal reflection capability of reflective
RIS but also caters to users and devices on the back of the
RIS. This feature enables it to meet the communication needs
of both sides of the RIS simultaneously, making it applicable
in a wider range of scenarios and more effective in solving
communication problems in complex environments.
RIS has indeed improved transmission performance, but
has also introduced complex optimization problems. In recent
years, extensive research has focused on optimizing beam-
arXiv:2512.01202v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
2
forming and phase shifts to achieve optimal spectral efficiency.
Due to the inherent complexity of RIS optimization problems,
finding a closed-form solution is often difficult. Additionally,
as the number of RIS reflective elements increases, costs can
rise uncontrollably. Therefore, selecting an appropriate method
has become a significant challenge in addressing RIS-related
beamforming and phase shift optimization problems [14].
Over the past few years, algorithms in artificial intelligence
(AI) and machine learning (ML) have remained a focal point
of academic research. Notably, some DRL algorithms have
demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in solving optimization
problems in communication systems [15, 16]. By learning
optimal behavioral policies through agent-environment inter-
actions, some DRL algorithms are particularly well-suited for
stochastic wireless communication environments [17]. This
paper assumes that direct transmissions between the base
station (BS) and users are entirely blocked. Due to multi-user
interference, the optimization problem is non-convex, with no
known optimal solution. To address this problem, we propose a
multi-user multiple-input single-output (MU-MISO) downlink
transmission algorithm based on DDPG, designed to jointly
optimize beamforming, phase shifts, and the location of UA V
to maximize the sum rate.
A. Prior Works
The joint optimization of beamforming and phase shifts in
RIS-assisted wireless communication systems has been exten-
sively studied. In [18], the joint optimization problem in MU-
MISO millimeter-wave communication systems was addressed
using the gradient-projection (GP) method. In [19], rate-
splitting multiple access (RSMA) technology was explored
in an RIS-assisted uplink system to enhance the performance
of the sum rate. In [20], constructive interference (CI) was
leveraged to design RIS phase shifts, enabling direct-link and
reflected signals to combine at each user’s side. The proposed
algorithm was used to alternately optimize the precoder and
RIS reflection elements to minimize the symbol error rate
(SER) in [21]. In [22], under both perfect and imperfect
CSI conditions, a low-complexity block coordinate descent
(BCD) method was proposed to decompose the problem into
subproblems for precoding and phase shift optimization.
Due to RIS’s superior performance, its integration with
diverse technologies and environments has become a crucial
research direction. Zhanget al.[23] combined RIS with cell-
free networks to enhance communication capacity by mitigat-
ing inter-cell interference. Nassirpouret al.[24] established
centralized and distributed RIS to evaluate the performance
of RIS-assisted Internet of Things (IoT) networks and the
optimal location distribution of RIS. Niuet al.[25] explored
the use of RIS to improve the security performance of IoT
network communication. In [26], the integration of UA Vs
with compact and portable RIS was proposed to address
communication challenges in special scenarios and enhance
security in multi-user network communication. In [27], power
allocation, RIS passive beamforming, and UA V trajectories
were optimized for the worst-case downlink secrecy rate in
vehicular networks with eavesdroppers. Linet al.[28] focused
on green communication in RIS-assisted UA V systems and
investigated the energy efficiency optimization problem for
fixed-wing UA V communications under RIS assistance. For
integrated sensing and communication (ISAC), Luoet al.
[29] proposed an alternating optimization (AO) algorithm
combining majorization-minimization (MM), penalty-based,
and manifold methods to solve non-convex problems in RIS-
assisted ISAC systems. Wanget al.[30] analyzed average
mean-square error (MSE) in practical RIS-MIMO systems
with hardware impairments, phase noise, and imperfect CSI.
STAR-RIS, as a revolutionary concept, has attracted significant
attention due to its capability to achieve full-space signal cov-
erage, substantially expanding the application boundaries and
design flexibility of RIS systems. Muet al.[31] systematically
proposed the fundamental signal model for STAR-RIS and in-
novatively designed three practical operating protocols: Energy
Splitting (ES), Mode Switching (MS), and Time Switching
(TS). Zuoet al.[32] further integrated STAR-RIS with NOMA
and proposed the STAR-RIS-NOMA system. Duet al.[33]
explored the application of STAR-RIS in wireless-powered IoT
networks.
ML has been a research hotspot in the scientific commu-
nity in recent years, especially since many unsupervised ML
algorithms are well-suited for solving complex, variable, high-
dimensional problems in wireless communication systems
[34]. Extensive research has demonstrated that ML, as one
of the most powerful AI tools, meets the demands of next-
generation mobile networks in terms of speed, intelligence,
and applications [35, 36]. In [37], the research gap was
addressed through a comparison of the performance of dif-
ferent ML tools in wireless networks. Deep learning (DL) and
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms were employed to op-
timize RIS-assisted non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA)
and orthogonal multiple access (OMA) systems, respectively.
In [38], physical layer security in RIS-assisted ISAC systems
was investigated, where artificial noise (AN) was employed
to disrupt eavesdroppers. Xuet al.[39] proposed a parame-
terized deep Q-network (PG-PDQN) algorithm to tackle the
challenges of mixed discrete-continuous action spaces in RIS-
assisted IoT systems. To maximize system capacity under en-
ergy constraints in RIS-assisted UA V NOMA systems, Zhang
et al.[40] employed a double deep Q-network (DDQN)-based
DRL algorithm to jointly optimize UA V flight trajectories and
RIS phase shifts. In [41], the RIS-assisted HSR network was
investigated to address QoS degradation in high-speed railway
(HSR) networks caused by external interference.
Online DRL algorithms are pivotal for future communi-
cations, primarily because they can operate without labeled
datasets or offline training. In particular, the DDPG algo-
rithm has demonstrated exceptional performance in solving
RIS-assisted wireless communication problems. Consequently,
researchers have extensively investigated DDPG-based al-
gorithms for RIS-assisted wireless communication systems.
Huanget al.[42] applied DDPG to optimize precoding and
phase shift matrices in RIS-assisted MU-MISO system to
maximize rewards. In [43], a distributed downlink beam-
forming method was proposed, which utilized the distributed
deterministic policy gradient with prioritized experience replay
3
(PRE-D4PG) algorithm to enhance system performance. Liet
al.[44] presented a distributed training decentralized execution
(DTDE) algorithm based on DDPG, achieving performance
gains in RIS-assisted system. Faisalet al.[45] introduced
the twin-delayed DDPG (TD3) algorithm to mitigateQvalue
overestimation bias. In [46], the TD3 algorithm was employed
to optimize RIS phase shifts and energy allocation for IoT
devices (IoTDs). In [47], long short-term memory (LSTM)
networks were integrated with DDPG to control data delivery.
Similarly, Wuet al.[48] proposed an adaptive learning DDPG
(AL-DDPG) algorithm for the joint optimization of RIS phase
shifts and BS beamforming in satellite-aerial-ground integrated
networks (SAGINs). Guoet al.[49] designed a multi-objective
DDPG (MO-DDPG) algorithm to maximize the achievable
sum rate under multi-objective optimization frameworks.
B. Contributions
To the best of our knowledge, the sum rate optimization
problem in STAR-RIS-UA V systems has not been thoroughly
investigated using DRL algorithms. In this paper, we propose
a STAR-RIS-UA V-assisted multi-user system model. To max-
imize the sum rate of users, we jointly optimize BS beam-
forming, RIS phase shifts, and the location of the UA V using
a DRL algorithm. Assuming complete blockage between the
BS and users, we address the intractable non-convex downlink
optimization problem, whose optimal solution is unknown,
by developing a novel DRL-based algorithm. Specifically, we
propose a CA-DDPG algorithm derived from DDPG to solve
this problem. Compared to conventional DDPG, our method
achieves superior performance. The main contributions are
summarized as follows:
•The installation of STAR-RIS can effectively bypass
obstacles to enhance the speed and quality of commu-
nication. Additionally, the integration of UA Vs further
increases the flexibility of STAR-RIS placement. By
mounting STAR-RIS on a UA V , its spatial position can
be dynamically adjusted to identify favorable channel
conditions, thereby facilitating more efficient signal trans-
mission. To optimize the sum rate of users, we establish
a downlink transmission scenario in a STAR-RIS-UA V-
assisted multi-user system, where the sum rate is maxi-
mized by jointly optimizing BS beamforming, RIS phase
shifts, and the location of the UA V .
•Considering the advantages of DRL algorithms, we de-
sign a new DRL algorithm called CA-DDPG based on
the DDPG framework to solve the proposed non-convex
optimization problem. To enhance the exploration of
actions in deterministic policies, we introduce a stochas-
tic perturbation factor. Additionally, the original evalu-
ation network limits further improvements in rewards.
Therefore, we extend the original DDPG framework by
designing a more complex critic network with higher
evaluation capabilities. Specifically, inspired by the abil-
ity of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to extract
local features, we incorporate convolutional layers into
the critic network to improve its evaluation performance.
•To validate CA-DDPG, we conduct numerical simula-
tions against multiple algorithms, including the traditional
BS Users 
BS Users 
STAR-RISUAV
Users 
BRH
TUH
RUH
Fig. 1. STAR-RIS-UA V communication system.
DDPG algorithm, TD3, and DDPG-based DTDE. Specif-
ically, we configure multiple parameter sets with varying
environmental configurations, including transmit power,
number of BS antennas, number of users, number of
RIS elements, learning rate, and decay coefficient. In
addition, we study the complexity and convergence of
the algorithm and investigate the performance of the CA-
DDPG compared to various algorithms under imperfect
CSI.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the system model and the sum rate maximization
problem. The details of the CA-DDPG algorithm for joint
beamforming, phase shifts, and UA V location design are
described in Section III. Section IV provides simulation results
and analysis. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section V .
Notations: For matrixH,H(i, j)denotes the entry at
thei-th row and thej-th column.H T andH H represent
transpose and conjugate transpose of matrixH, andh k is
thek-th column vector ofH. For column vectorx,x(i)is
thei-th element, and∥x∥denotes its magnitude.diag(x)
represents a diagonal matrix, whose diagonal elements are
the corresponding elements of vectorx.C N×1 represents a
complex vector with dimensionN, andC N×M represents
a matrix in the complex field.E[·]is statistical expectation,
andCN(0, σ2)denotes a complex Gaussian distribution with
mean 0 and varianceσ 2. For complex numberc,|c|denotes
the absolute value of the complex number.Re(c)andIm(c)
denote the real and imaginary parts ofc, respectively.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM
FORMULATION
A. System Model
We consider an STAR-RIS-UA V-assisted multi-user down-
link wireless communication system, consisting of a BS with
Mantennas, an STAR-RIS withNreflective elements andN
transmissive elements,Ksingle-antenna users on the reflection
side and anotherKsingle antenna users on the transmission
side, as illustrated in Fig.1. Due to large obstacles between
4
the BS and users in practical scenarios, the direct link is
completely blocked, leading to severe degradation or even
failure of transmission quality. To address this, the STAR-
RIS is deployed to reconstruct the communication path by
intelligently reflecting signals. Specifically, signals transmitted
by the BS are phase-adjusted via the controller-regulated RIS
and then reflected or transmitted to the users. The channel
matrices from the BS to the RIS, the channel vector from
the RIS to the users on the reflective side, and the users on
the transmissive side are denoted asH BR ∈C N×M ,H RU ∈
CN×1 andH TU ∈C N×1 respectively. The entries ofH BR,
HRU andH TU are modeled as independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) complex Gaussian random variables. The
BS is located at horizontal coordinatesC B = [x, y]with
heighth B. The UA V is equipped with a STAR-RIS and
continuously moves in the air; its position at timetis de-
noted asC R[t] = [x[t], y[t]], and it flies at a fixed altitude
hR. Users on the reflection side are located at coordinates
CR,K = [xR,K, yR,K], while those on the transmission side
are located at coordinatesC T,K = [xT,K , yT,K ].
The signal received by thek-th user on the reflective surface
and the signal received by thek-th user on the transmissive
surface can be represented as
yr,k =H T
RU ΘRHBRWrxr +z r,k,(1)
yt,k =H T
TU ΘTHBRWtxt +z t,k,(2)
wherey r,k,y t,k denote the signals received by thek-th user on
the reflective and transmissive side. The signals are represented
byx r,x t and satisfyE[x 2
r] = 1,E[x 2
t ] = 1.z r,k,z t,k repre-
sent zero-mean additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with
varianceσ 2, i.e.,z r,k ∼ CN(0, σ2)andz r,k ∼ CN(0, σ2).
Wr ∈C M×K ,W t ∈C M×K denote the BS beamforming
matrix on the reflective and transmissive side, respectively. The
phase shift matrices of the reflective RIS and transmissive RIS
are defined as
ΘR =diag[
p
β1r ϕr,1,
p
β2r ϕr,2, . . . ,
p
βirϕr,i, . . . ,
q
βNr ϕr,N],
(3)
ΘT =diag[
q
β1
t ϕt,1,
q
β2
t ϕt,2, . . . ,
q
βi
tϕt,i, . . . ,
q
βN
t ϕt,N ],
(4)
whereϕ r,i =e jφr,i andϕ t,i =e jφt,i.φ r,i,φ t,i represent
the RIS phase shift angles and satisfyφ r,i ∈[0,2π),φ t,i ∈
[0,2π).β i
r,β i
t indicate the STAR-RIS operating in the energy
splitting mode, ensure each element operates in a mode that
enables simultaneous reflection and transmission.β i
r ∈[0,1],
βi
t ∈[0,1]and satisfyβ i
r +β i
t = 1. Note thatΘ= [Θ r,Θ t]
is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are given by
Θr(i, i) =ϕr,i,Θ t(i, i) =ϕt,i and satisfy|Θ r(i, i)|2 = 1,
|Θt(i, i)|2 = 1, whereϕ r,i,ϕ t,i are the phase shift caused by
the elements of the RIS.
We assume that the signal can be perfectly reflected and
transmitted by the STAR-RIS without any signal loss. For
convenience, the received signal models in (1) and (2) can
be further rewritten as
yr,k =HT
RU ΘRHBRwr,kxr,k
+
KX
n,n̸=k
HT
RU ΘRHBRwr,nxr,n +z r,k, (5)
yt,k =HT
TU ΘT HBRwt,kxt,k
+
KX
n,n̸=k
HT
TU ΘTHBRwt,nxt,n +z t,k, (6)
wherew r,k,w t,k represent thek-th column vector in the
matricesW r,W t and the second term in (5) and (6) is the
interference term under the cochannel.
The SINR of the received signal of thek-th user on the
reflective and transmissive sides are represented respectively
as
γr,k = |HT
RU ΘRHBRwr,k|2
PK
n=1,n̸=k |HT
RU ΘRHBRwr,n|2 +σ 2
, (7)
γt,k = |HT
TU ΘT HBRwt,k|2
PK
n=1,n̸=k |HT
TU ΘT HBRwt,n|2 +σ 2
. (8)
This paper focuses on the sum of the users’ downlink
transmission rates as an indicator to evaluate the quality of
the system. Thek-th user data transfer rate on the reflective
and transmissive sides is expressed, respectively, as
Rr,k = log2(1 +γ r,k),(9)
Rt,k = log2(1 +γ t,k),(10)
the sum of all users’ transmission rates is expressed as
R=
KX
k
(Rr,k +R t,k).(11)
B. Problem Formulation
In this paper, we assume the CSI is known and consider op-
timizing the beamforming matrixW, the phase shift matrices
ΘR,Θ T and the UA V’s horizontal coordinatesCR to improve
system performance. Under this framework, the problem is
formulated as
(P1)max
W,ΘR,ΘT,CR
R(W,Θ R,Θ T,C R)
s.t.tr{WW H} ≤Pt (12a)
|ϕr,n|= 1∀n= 1,2, . . . , N(12b)
|ϕt,n|= 1∀n= 1,2, . . . , N(12c)
βi
r, βi
t ∈[0,1](12d)
βi
r +β i
t = 1(12e)
xmin < xB < xmax (12f)
ymin < yB < ymax (12g)
whereP t represents the maximum output power of the BS,
and (12a) indicates that the limited transmission power cannot
exceedP t. (12b), (12c) indicate that the amplitude of the RIS
elements is1to ensure that the RIS passively reflects the
5
signals without amplifying the received signal. (12d), (12e)
represent the range of the energy distribution ratio between
reflection and transmission of STAR-RIS, with their sum
equal to1. (12f) and (12g) represent the horizontal coordinate
limits of the UA V . It can be seen that the problem is a non-
convex problem due to the non-convexity of the objective
function as well as the unit module constraint. Given the
rapid development and effective application of ML algorithms
in recent years, this paper uses a DRL based algorithm to
find the optimalW,Θ R,Θ T andC R in order to solve the
optimization problem.
III. SOLUTION BASED ON DRL
In this section, we first review the principles of DRL,
and then provide a detailed explanation of the CA-DDPG
framework and its fundamental principles. Finally, we describe
the sum rate optimization process of the RIS-assisted commu-
nication system under the CA-DDPG framework.
A. Overview of DRL
RL constitutes a crucial component of ML, aiming to
identify the optimal policy for making decisions through envi-
ronmental interaction. The RL framework primarily involves
two parts: the agent and the environment. The agent continu-
ously observes and analyzes the environment to determine the
optimal strategy that maximizes cumulative future rewards.
Conceptually, this learning paradigm aligns with the Markov
decision process (MDP) framework, which models sequential
decision-making in stochastic environments. The fundamental
elements of RL include: states, actions, rewards, policies, and
the state-action value function.
1) State:S= [s 1, s2, ..., st, st+1, ...]indicates the state
space. States t ∈Sindicates some or all cases perceived by
the agent at time stept, ands t+1 indicates the next state of
st.
2) Action:A= [a 1, a2, ..., at, at+1, ...]represents the ac-
tion space. Actiona t ∈Arepresents the measures taken by
following the strategy at time instantt, and the states t will
transit to the next states t+1.
3) Reward:rewardr t indicates the immediate return after
the states t takes the actiona t. It is a metric of performance
that indicates the degree of effect the states t takes actiona t.
4) Strategy:the probability set for the agent to take an ac-
tion in a certain state is policyπ, and meets P
at∈A π(st, at) =
1, whereπ(s t, at)represents the probability of taking action
at in the states t.
5) State-action value function:agents may fall into a “my-
opic dilemma” when focusing solely on immediate rewards.
Therefore, in addition to focusing on immediate rewards,
we should go a step further and consider future rewards.
Qπ(st, at)is defined as the state-action value function, which
represents the expectation of immediate rewards and future
cumulative rewards received given the states t and actiona t.
TheQfunction of executing policyπcan be expressed as
Qπ(st, at) =E π[Rt|s=s t, a=at],(13)
whereR t = P∞
τ=0 λτ rt+τ+1 represents the sum of future
discount rewards, andλ∈(0,1]is the discount rate.
TheQfunction satisfies the Bellmann equation as follows
Qπ(st, at) =E π[rt+1|s=s t, a=at] +λ
X
st+1∈S
Pa
(st→st+1)
×

 X
at+1∈A
π(st+1, at+1)Qπ(st+1, at+1)

,(14)
whereP a
(st→st+1) =P(s ′ =s t+1|s=s t, a=a t)represents
the state transition probability of taking the actiona t from
statesto states t+1 and states ′ represents the next state ofs.
Using the method of Q-learning to find the optimal policy
, the optimalQfunction can be rewritten as
Q∗
π(st, at) =rt+1(s=s t, a=at, π=π∗)+
λ
X
st+1∈S
Pa
(st→st+1) max
at+1∈A
Q∗
π(st+1, at+1).
(15)
The Bellman equataion (15) can be solved recursively, and
the recursive update rule ofQfunction is as follows
Q∗
π(st, at)←(1−β)Q ∗
π(st, at)+
β(rt+1 +λmax
at∈A
Qπ(st+1, at)),(16)
whereβrepresents the learning rate of theQfunction.
Q-learning can efficiently accomplish tasks when the state
space and action space are small or finite. However, when the
state and action spaces become large or even infinite, theQ
table that records allQvalues in Q-learning would require an
enormous storage capacity, which is clearly impractical. To
address this issue, the deep Q network (DQN) was developed,
which replaces theQtable with a deep neural network (DNN).
The DNN estimates the system model as a combination of
multiple nonlinear functions through policy functions, action
functions, and state-value functions, where both actions and
Qfunction are represented by DNNs rather than explicit
mathematical models. The DNN takes the observed state of the
environment as input and produces actions as output. Another
DNN estimates theQvalues of the actions. For DRL, the
neural network is trained with the parameterµto evaluate the
Qvalue, so theQfunction of the agent can be represented by
the parameterµas follows
Qπ(st, at;µ) =E π[Rt|S=s t, A=at],(17)
whereµrepresents the bias and weighting parameters of
the neural network in DQN, and the optimalQfunction is
obtained by using the stochastic optimization algorithm, rather
than by directly updating theQfunction. The parameterµ
update rule is as follows
µt+1 =µ t +ρ∇ µℓ(µ),(18)
whereρrepresents the learning rate of updatingµ, and∇ µ
represents the gradient of the loss functionℓ(µ).
The loss function is defined as the difference between
the predicted value and the actual target value of the neural
network output. The neural network in the DQN method takes
6
the state as input and then estimates the maximum action
with theQvalue function as the output action. After each
round, the parameterµof the neural network is updated to
obtain a more accurateQvalue estimate. Since the actual
target value is unknown in RL, it is necessary to define two
neural networks with identical structures: a training network
and a target network, parameterized byµ (train) andµ (target),
respectively. The difference between the predicted values and
the actual target values is expressed by the loss function as
ℓ(µ) =
 
y−Q π(µ(train)|st, at)
2
(19)
The target neural network is synchronized with the training
neural network update at a certain frequency, and the actual
target valueyis defined as
y=r t+1(st, at) +λmax
a′
t∈A
Qπ(µ(target)|st+1, a′
t).(20)
Compared to DQN, the DDPG algorithm, based on the
actor-critic framework can handle continuous action spaces
and employs a deterministic policy that maps a given state
to a specific action. The DDPG algorithm consists of four
DNNs: the training actor network, the target actor network, the
training critic network and the target critic network. The actor
network generates actions based on the current state, while
the critic network is responsible for evaluating based on the
performance of states and actions. The action is approximated
using the participant network, thus eliminating the need for
a next non-convex optimization step to find the maximumQ
value function. The update rules for the training critic network
are as follows
µc
t+1 =µ c
t −ξ c∇µc
(train)
ℓ(µc
(train)),(21)
ℓ(µc
(train)) =

rt +λQ π(µc
(target)|st+1, a
′
t)−Q π(µc
(train)|st, at)
2
,
(22)
whereξ c is the learning rate of the training critic network.
∇µc
(train)
ℓ(µc
(train))represents the gradient of the training
critic networkµ c
(train).a
′
t is the action output of the target
actor network. The parameters of the target network are
updated after a certain number of episodes to synchronize with
the parameters of the training network, and the update rule for
the training actor network is as follows
µa
t+1 =µ a
t −ξ a∇aQπ(µc
(target)|st, at)∇µa
(train) π(µa
(train)|st),
(23)
whereξ a is the learning rate of the actor network,
∇aQπ(µc
(target)|st, at)and∇ µa
(train) π(µa
(train)|st)represent the gra-
dients of the target critic network and the training actor
network with respect to their parametersµ c
(target) andµ c
(train),
respectively. As can be seen from (23), the parameter update
strategy is influenced by the gradient of the action to ensure
that the next action is selected according to the direction of
the optimal action strategy, thus optimizing theQfunction.
The update rules for the target actor and critic networks are
as follows
µa
(target) ←(1−τ)µ a
(target) +τµ a
(train),(24)
µc
(target) ←(1−τ)µ c
(target) +τµ c
(train),(25)
whereτis the soft update coefficient of the target actor and
critic networks.
B. CA-DDPG Framework
The Q-learning method is straightforward and easy to im-
plement, but it is not an optimal choice for complex, high-
dimensional problems. While DQN can address the tradi-
tional curse of dimensionality in high-dimensional spaces and
demonstrates strong effectiveness in handling discrete state
problems, its performance degrades significantly in continuous
action domains. The DDPG algorithm employs the actor-
critic architecture, which can effectively handle continuous
control tasks and enhance the efficiency of policy updates.
Building on DDPG, our proposed CA-DDPG algorithm has
been modified in the following aspects. To address DDPGs
limitations in action exploration efficiency, we introduce a
stochastic noise factor into the actor network to facilitate
a more comprehensive exploration of the action space. As
the number of actions increases, the original critic network’s
evaluation performance becomes insufficient, and its ability
to distinguish between good and bad actions is suboptimal.
Therefore, we design an improved critic network to enhance
the evaluation capability. This architecture significantly boosts
the accuracy of the estimation ofQvalue by precisely dif-
ferentiating between better and suboptimal state-action pairs,
ultimately enhancing overall performance of the system. The
detailed framework of the CA-DDPG algorithm is illustrated
in Fig.2.
1) State space:the states t at time steptconsists of the
actiona (t−1) from the previous time step(t−1), transmit
powerT p, receiving powerR p, the channel state matrices
HBR andH RU . The transmitting powerT p of thek-th user
and receiving powerR p are expressed as
Tp =||W k||2 =|W H
k Wk|2 (26)
Rp =|H T
RU ΘHBRW|2.(27)
Since the neural network can only accept real numbers as
inputs, when constructing the states, any complex numbers
must be split into their real and imaginary parts before
being used as inputs. Given the transmission symbol with
unit variance, the transmission power of thek-th user is
given by∥W k∥2 =
Re{WH
k Wk}
2
+
Im{WH
k Wk}
2
. Let
PW (n) =H T
RU ΘHBRW(n), the receiving power of thek-th
user is defined asR p(n) =|Re{P W (n)}|2 +|Im{P W (n)}|2.
The first term of the transmission power and receiving power is
the real part, and the second term is the imaginary part. These
parts serve as independent input ports for the actor network
and the critic network. Therefore, the state at time steptis
defined as
st = [a(t−1), Tp, Rp,H BR,H RU ,H TU ].(28)
7
Agent
EnvironmentEnvironment
DNN
Convolutional 
layers
Convolutional 
layers
Noise
DNN
Noise
DNN
Noise
DNN
DNN DNN
Training Target
Policy 
Gradient
Policy 
Gradient
Update Loss 
Function
Loss 
Function
Update
1( , , )t t ts r s +
Soft 
Update
Action
Action Action Action Action 
StateState
Soft 
Update
t
'
t
o
o
i
'
i
ts
t
Q
Q
Q
Actor
Net
Actor
Net
Critic
Net
Critic
Net
Fig. 2. CA-DDPG framework.
2) Action space:the actiona t at time steptis constructed
from the transmission beamforming matrixWand the phase
shift matrixΘ. Similarly,WandΘare decomposed asW=
Re(W) +Im(W)andΘ=Re(Θ) +Im(Θ), respectively.
The actiona t of the time steptis expressed as
at = [Wt,Θ R
t,Θ T
t,C R
t].(29)
3) Reward:when the agent selects an action at time step
t, the rewardr t is used to evaluate the quality of the strategy.
In this paper, our goal is to find the optimal system sum rate
R, so the reward function is represented by the system sum
rateRas follows
rt =R t.(30)
C. Framework of Convolutional Layer
The CNN represents a class of feedforward neural networks
inspired by biological visual perception mechanisms. The core
components of CNN include convolutional layers, activation
functions, pooling layers, fully connected layers, and normal-
ization layers.
This paper mainly applies convolutional layers to enhance
the critic network. Specifically, convolutional layers comprise
key components such as kernels, kernel sizes, strides, and
padding configurations. The basic framework of convolution
is shown in Fig.3. The mathematical foundation of CNN
lies in convolution operations, where multiple learnable filters
are applied to input data to automatically extract hierarchical
features. These filters slide across the spatial dimensions of
the input, computing dot products within local receptive fields
to construct hierarchical feature representations. As the depth
of the network increases, the model progressively captures
features ranging from simple patterns to complex seman-
tic representations, enabling tasks such as classification and
recognition. Furthermore, pooling operations reduce the spatial
dimensions of feature maps while enhancing invariance to
input transformations. The entire training process is driven by
backpropagation, where filter weights are optimized through
loss function minimization to reduce prediction errors.
1) Convolutional Kernel:The convolutional kernel is a core
component of the convolutional layer. Essentially, a convolu-
tional kernel is a small weight matrix used to extract local
features from the input data. Its operating principle is similar
to that of a “sliding window filter”, which progressively scans
the input data through convolution operations and to generate
a feature map. The convolutional kernel is typically a square
matrix, with each corresponding position storing a learnable
weight coefficient. The kernel size is usuallyn×n, which
determines the size of the receptive field. A convolutional
layer can contain multiple kernels simultaneously, and each
kernel generates an independent feature map. Additionally, the
weight coefficients of the convolutional kernel are automati-
cally optimized through backpropagation, eliminating the need
for manual design.
2) Stride:The stride determines the distance that the con-
volutional kernel moves during each step of the convolution
process. The kernel slides over the input according to the
stride, performing dot product and summation operations
region by region to compute a weighted combination of local
features.
3) Padding:Padding refers to adding extra values around
the edges of the input data to adjust its dimensions while
preserving edge information.
The dimensional transformations in a convolutional layer
follow the principle given by
J′ = (J+ 2p−k s)
sd
+ 1,(31)
whereJrepresents the input matrix size,J
′
represents the
output matrix size,prepresents the number of padding,k s
represents the convolution kernel size, ands d represents the
stride.
The convolutional layer can automatically extract key fea-
tures through local receptive fields and weight sharing. The
discriminative features extracted by the convolutional layer
enable the critic to discern subtle state differences, thereby
providing a more reliable policy gradient. Meanwhile, the
translation invariance of the convolution makes the network
more robust to input noise, enabling the policy to remain
stable in complex environments. By enhancing the critic’s state
feature extraction capabilities through convolutional layer,
the network can more accurately capture critical information
within states. Combined with the global integration of fully
connected layers and action fusion, this ultimately achieves
preciseQvalue estimation.
8
2× 2 
Convolutional 
Kernel
2 -1
1 0
2 -1
1 0
Stride = 1
Matrix
Input
3
Hidden
Output
5
0 1 2 3
4 5 6 7
8 9 10 11
12 13 14 15
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
15
0× 2+(-1)× 1
+1× 4+0× 5=3
0× 2+(-1)× 1
+1× 4+0× 5=3
Fig. 3. Basic framework of convolution.
D. Algorithm Description
Our proposed algorithm consists of four networks: actor
networkµ a
(train), actor target networkµ a
(target), critic network
µc
(train), and critic target networkµ c
(target). The parameters of
the actor target network and critic target network are obtained
by copying the actor and critic networks.
At the beginning of the algorithm, the experience replay
bufferB, actor networkµ a
(train), critic networkµ c
(train), precoding
matrixWand phase shift matrixΘshould be initialized first.
In this paper, we simply initialize the precoding matrixW
and the phase shift matrixΘwith Gaussian random matrices
that satisfies the constraints. Next, the initial states t is input
to the actor network to generate an actiona i. This action is
then perturbed by random factors to produce the final selected
actiona t. The specific rule for generating actiona t is as
follows
at =a i +ηo,(32)
whereηrepresents the decreasing coefficient of the random
factor, which decreases with the number of time steps.o
represents a random factor that follows a normal distribution
and has the same format as the actiona t. After performing
the action, we obtain the next states t+1 and rewardr t, and
then we save the resulting data as tuples(s t, at, rt, st+1)into
the experience replay bufferB. When calculating theQvalue,
a small batch of tuples(s t, at, rt, st+1)is extracted from the
experience replay bufferBto train the critic network to receive
the states t+1 and actiona t+1 as input. The state is first
processed by the convolutional layers, after which the output
is combined with the action and both are fed into the linear
neural network to compute the targetQvalue. The final target
Qvalue is obtained by multiplying the targetQvalue with
the discount coefficient and adding the rewardr t.
At the same time, the currentQvalue is obtained with
states t and actiona t as input. The loss of the training critic
network is calculated using the mean square loss function, and
Algorithm 1CA-DDPG Framework
Input:Channel state information(H BR,H RU ,H TU )of all
the users.
Initialization:beamforming matrixW, phase shift matrix
ΘR andΘ T, UA V’s horizontal coordinateC R,
experience replay bufferB, training actor network para-
meterµ a
(train), training critic network parameterµ c
(train), target
actor network parameterµ a
(target), target critic network para-
meterµ c
(target).
Output:optimal actiona t, sum rateRandQvalue function.
1:foreach episodedo
2:Get channel informationH BR,H RU ,H TU
3:Obtain the initial states 0 ∈S, S←s 0.
4:foreach time stepdo
5:Observe the initial states t.
6:Obtain actiona i.
7:Add noise random factorotoa i.
8:Execute the actiona t =a i +ηo.
9:Observe next states t+1 and rewardr t.
10:Store the experience(s t, at, rt, st+1)intoB.
11:Sample a minibatch randomly formB.
12:Input the states t and convolve it through convo-
lutional layers.
13:Obtain theQvalue function from the critic net-
work.
14:Update the parameters of the critic network by
minimizing the critic’s loss via equation (22).
15:Update the parameters of actor network with sam-
pled policy gradients by equation (23).
16:EveryJsteps, soft update the parameters of the
target networks by equation (24) and (25).
17:Update the states t+1.
18:end for
19:end for
optimize the parameters of the training critic network using
backpropagation loss. In contrast, the loss of the training actor
network is obtained by the states t and actiona t input to
the training critic network to optimize the parameters of the
training actor network. After a certain number of steps, the
parameters of the target actor and critic networks are softly
updated with the training network parameters. The update rules
as consistent as (24) and (25). Algorithm 1 outlines the steps
of the CA-DDPG framework.
E. Complexity Analysis
In general, the complexity of the DDPG algorithm is
determined by the specification of the DNN. For the entire
network, if we assume that the number of neurons in each
layer isu, the total number of parameters is approximately
O(Lu2), whereLis the number of neural network layers.
The state space dimension of DDPG algorithm isD s = 3K+
2NM+ 4NK+ 2MK+ 4N+ 2. Therefore, the complexity
of the DNN is aboutO(LD 2
s), and the total complexity of the
training actor-critic network and the target actor-critic network
isO(4LD 2
s), so the complexity of the DDPG algorithm
9
isO(4LD 2
s). The TD3 algorithm has six neural networks,
including two actor networks and four critic networks, so the
complexity of the TD3 algorithm isO(6LD 2
s). The proposed
CA-DDPG algorithm incorporates convolutional layers into
the critic network, with the same number of convolutional
layers as DNN and the number of channels set toD s. In this
paper, we assume that the number of convolutional layers is
L′ andL ′ less thanL. Therefore, the complexity of the CA-
DDPG algorithm isO(4LD 2
s + 2L′D2
s).
IV. NUMERICAL EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we perform a simulation of the STAR-RIS-
UA V-assisted wireless communication system. To evaluate the
performance of the proposed algorithms, we compare them
with the DDPG algorithm and some new DRL algorithms.
We assume that the system consists of a BS withMantenna,
Ksingle antenna users on the reflecting side and the sameK
single antenna users on the transmitting side, a UA V located
between the base station and the users, and equipped with
STAR-RIS elements ofNRIS units. The BSs coordinates are
set to[0,0], the coordinates of all reflective users are[80,0],
the coordinates of the transmissive users are[80,80], the initial
coordinates of the UA V are[40,20], with a fixed height of 30
meters. Moreover, we assume that the channel state matrices
HBR,H RU andH TU follow the rayleigh distribution, and
the transmission power does not exceedP t. The input of the
actor network is the state, and the size is the dimension of the
state space. The actor network performs non-linear activation
using the tanh activation function, and the output is an action
vector. The critic network has two parts, the convolutional
layer and the linear layer. the convolutional layer is activated
using the ReLU function, and the linear layer is activated
using the tanh activation function. Moreover, the parameters
of the actor and critic networks are updated using the Adam
optimizer. The parameter list for the CA-DDPG algorithm is
detailed in Table I. In addition, this paper also records the
runtime of various algorithms to demonstrate their execution
speed. Table II provides a detailed explanation of the runtime.
A. Algorithm Overview
To validate the algorithm’s performance, we conducted
comparative experiments with several methods, including the
classical DDPG algorithm and recently proposed algorithms:
1) DDPG:The DDPG algorithm, which effectively solves
problems in continuous action spaces, is based on the actor-
critic framework. It has been successfully applied to optimize
beamforming and phase shift matrices for maximizing the sum
rate in RIS-aided wireless communication systems.
2) DDPG-based DTDE:The DDPG-based DTDE frame-
work, which is built upon DDPG, maximizes the sum rate by
optimizing the system’s beamforming matrix and phase shift
matrix. [44].
3) TD3:The TD3 algorithm employs six neural networks,
including two actor networks and four critic networks. It
mitigates overestimation issues through delayed policy updates
and target policy smoothing, optimizing the beamforming and
phase shift matrices in RIS-assisted systems.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter Description Value
B Experience replay buffer size 80000
bm Mini-batch size 16
Ep Maximum number of steps per episode 80000
τ Soft update rate 0.001
ξa Actor learning rate 0.001
ξc Critic learning rate 0.001
dc
Decaying rate for training critic net-
work uptate 0.00001
da
Decaying rate for training actor net-
work uptate 0.00001
λ Discount factor 0.8
ks Convolution kernel size 1
p Convolutional layer’s padding 0
sd Convolutional layer’s stride 1
J
The number of steps for synchronizing
updates between the training network
and the target network
1
TABLE II
RUNTIME
Algorithm Complexity Runtime Per Episode(second)
CA-DDPG O(4LD2
s + 2L′D2
s) 1836.2
TD3 O(6LD2
s) 2020
DDPG O(4LD2
s) 1460.8
B. Numerical Analysis
As shown in Fig.4, we evaluate the relationship between
transmit power variations and the maximum sum rate for the
proposed CA-DDPG algorithm, with a comparative analysis
against multiple DRL algorithms. The experimental envi-
ronment is uniformly configured withM= 4,K= 4,
andN= 16. The results demonstrate that the sum rate
consistently improves as transmit power increases. Recently
proposed algorithms exhibit superior performance compared
to classical DRL methods, while the CA-DDPG algorithm
outperforms other algorithms under both low-power and high-
power conditions.
To further verify the effectiveness of the proposed algo-
rithm, we decompose it and conduct ablation experiments. As
shown in Fig.5, simply increasing the convolutional layers
does not improve the sum rate, while the introduction of
the noise factor effectively enhances the system’s sum rate.
Our proposed algorithm combines these two components and
the experimental results demonstrate a significant performance
improvement. In addition, we adjust the parameters of the con-
volutional layers. The simulation results indicate that changes
in kernel size and padding have a certain impact on the exper-
imental results, but the overall performance remains relatively
consistent. It can be inferred that using appropriate parameters
under different signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) conditions can
yield better performance gains.
To further investigate the performance of different algo-
rithms with the same power, we focused on the results of
instantaneous rewards and average rewards. The method for
10
-
10- 50 5 1 01 52 02 53 01
02
03
04
05
06
07
0Sum Rate (bps/Hz)P
t (dB) 
C A-DDPG 
T D3 
D DPG-based DTDE 
D DPG
Fig. 4. Sum rate of four algorithms under differentP t.
-
10- 50 5 1 01 52 02 53 01
02
03
04
05
06
07
0Sum Rate (bps/Hz)P
t (dB) 
CA-DDPG(kernel size=1,padding=0) 
CA-DDPG(kernel size=3,padding=1) 
CA-DDPG(kernel size=5,padding=2) 
CA-DDPG(without convolutional layer) 
CA-DDPG(without noise) 
D DPG
Fig. 5. Ablation experiment of the proposed algorithm.
calculating the average reward is as follows
Avg reward(Ei) =
PEi
e=1 reward(e)
Ei
, Ei = 1,2, . . . , Ep,
(33)
whereE i represents thei-th step, andE p represents the
maximum number of steps. Fig.6 illustrates the relationship
between time steps and instantaneous rewards for different
algorithms under identical SNR conditions. As shown in the
figure, atP t = 10dB, all algorithms exhibit increasing rewards
with time steps, and the reward approaches the convergence
value nearSteps= 40000and eventually stabilizes. Notably,
the CA-DDPG algorithm consistently achieves higher rewards
than all baseline methods.
To investigate the CA-DDPG algorithm, we examined the
rewards atP t ={−10,0,10,20,30}dB, as shown in Fig.7.
The results reveal that the sum rate gradually increases with
training steps and eventually converges. The transmit power
level creates distinct stratification in sum rate performance,
where higher transmit power yields greater sum rate. More-
0
2 00004 00006 00008 00005
1
01
52
02
53
03
54
0R
ewards (bps/Hz)S
teps 
CA-DDPG(Intant rewards) 
TD3(Intant rewards) 
DDPG-based DTDE(Intant rewards) 
DDPG(Intant rewards) 
CA-DDPG(Average rewards) 
TD3(Average rewards) 
DDPG-based DTDE(Average rewards) 
DDPG(Average rewards)
Fig. 6. Rewards versus time steps under different algorithms.
0
2 00004 00006 00008 00001
02
03
04
05
06
07
0R
ewards (bps/Hz)S
teps 
Pt  = 30dB 
Pt  = 20dB 
Pt  = 10dB 
Pt  = 0dB 
Pt  = -10dB
Fig. 7. Rewards versus time steps under differentP t.
over, the reward curve under lower transmit power exhibits
smoother fluctuations, whereas the curve becomes increasingly
volatile at higher power levels.
Fig.8 shows the relationship between the number of BS
antennas and users and the sum rate. The experimental en-
vironment is set toM=K={8,12,16,20}andN= 16.
As shown in the figure, as the number of BS antennas and
users increases, the sum rate under multi-antenna and multi-
user scenarios is higher at convergence. It should be noted
that convergence occurs more quickly when the number of
antennas and users is smaller.
To further explore the performance of the proposed algo-
rithm, we investigated the hyperparameters of several DRL
algorithms. As shown in Fig.9, the magnitude of the learning
rateξ a =ξ c is not positively correlated with the sum rate.
When the learning rate is 0.001, the algorithm achieves the
highest sum rate. It can be inferred that further adjustments to
the learning rate may yield better results.
Fig.10 shows the graph of the reward with time
11
0
2 00004 00006 00008 00001
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
01
001
10R
ewards (bps/Hz)S
teps 
M = K = 20 
M = K = 16 
M = K = 12 
M = K = 8
Fig. 8. Rewards versus time steps under differentMandK.
0
2 00004 00006 00008 00005
1
01
52
02
53
03
54
0R
ewards (bps/Hz)S
teps 
Learning rate=0.01 
Learning rate=0.001 
Learning rate=0.0001 
Learning rate=0.00001
Fig. 9. Rewards versus time steps under differentξ.
steps for different decaying ratesd c =d a =
{0.001,0.0001,0.00001,0.000001}. As shown in Fig.10,
when the decaying rate is 0.0001, the reward gradually
surpasses the other curves and becomes the highest as the
time steps increase. This demonstrates that an appropriate
decaying rate can lead to better algorithm performance.
However, it is also worth noting that compared to other
hyperparameters, the gaps between the four curves generated
by different decaying rates are relatively small, and their
convergence and stability characteristics are similar.
Finally, we conduct a study on the system under imperfect
CSI, as shown in Fig.11. We useδto represent the uncertainty
of the channel, which is expressed as follows
δ=
E
h
|ˆh−h| 2
i
E
h
|ˆh|2
i ,(34)
where ˆh=h+ ∆his the estimated channel,his the actual
channel and∆his the estimated error and is assumed to follow
0
2 00004 00006 00008 00005
1
01
52
02
53
03
54
0R
ewards (bps/Hz)S
teps 
Decay = 0.001 
Decay = 0.0001 
Decay = 0.00001 
Decay = 0.000001 
Decay = 0.001(Average rewards) 
Decay = 0.0001(Average rewards) 
Decay = 0.00001(Average rewards) 
Decay = 0.000001(Average rewards)
Fig. 10. Rewards versus time steps under differentd c.
-
10- 50 5 1 01 52 02 53 01
02
03
04
05
06
07
0Sum Rate (bps/Hz)P
t (dB) 
CA-DDPG(δ = 0) 
TD3(δ = 0) 
DDPG-based DTDE(δ = 0) 
DDPG(δ = 0) 
CA-DDPG(δ = 0.05) 
TD3(δ = 0.05) 
DDPG-based DTDE(δ = 0.05) 
DDPG(δ = 0.05) 
CA-DDPG(δ = 0.1) 
TD3(δ = 0.1) 
DDPG-based DTDE(δ = 0.1) 
DDPG(δ = 0.1)
Fig. 11. Sum rate as a function ofP t for different algorithms
under differentδ.
a zero-mean Gaussian distribution. Under imperfect CSI, both
our proposed algorithm and the other algorithms experience
performance losses, and which increase asδbecomes larger.
However, for the sameδ, the CA-DDPG algorithm still has a
significant performance lead among the other algorithms, thus
proving the feasibility of our proposed algorithm in different
scenarios.
As shown in Fig.12, asδincreases, all algorithms exhibit a
certain degree of performance degradation. However, our pro-
posed algorithm still demonstrates strong performance com-
pared to the others, indicating that CA-DDPG can effectively
improve the system’s sum rate, even in harsh or dynamic
channel environments.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper investigates the problem of beamforming, phase
shift, and UA V location optimization in RIS-aided wireless
12
0
0 .0250 .050 .0750 .1152
02
53
03
54
0Sum Rate (bps/Hz)δ
 
C A-DDPG 
T D3 
D DPG-based DTDE 
D DPG
Fig. 12. Sum rate as a function ofδfor different algorithms.
communication systems. With the rapid development of mod-
ern wireless communications, the optimization problem in
wireless communication has become increasingly complex
and difficult to solve. To address this challenge, we lever-
age DRL algorithms, which have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in solving such problems. Building upon the
DDPG framework, we propose the CA-DDPG algorithm to
further optimize beamforming, phase shift, and UA V’s loca-
tion, thereby enhancing the maximum sum rate performance of
RIS-aided systems. Our main innovation lies in the integration
of convolutional layers into the DDPG architecture. Through
convolution operations, the critic network achieves superior
performance, significantly improving the maximum sum rate
for users. Simulation results demonstrate that our proposed
algorithm outperforms baseline methods in both low-SNR and
high-SNR scenarios. Furthermore, an important extension of
CA-DDPG lies in its application to multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning (MADRL) frameworks. By adapting the
CA-DDPG architecture to multi-agent settings, it can learn
effective cooperative policies while preserving the privacy of
local observations and reducing computational overhead. In
addition, the proposed CA-DDPG framework demonstrates
significant potential in integrated sensing and communica-
tion (ISAC) optimization scenarios. By expanding the state
space of CA-DDPG to incorporate sensing-related metrics,
the framework can optimize both communication and sensing
performance holistically.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Sang, Y . Yuan, W. Tang, Y . Li, X. Li, S. Jin, Q. Cheng,
and T. J. Cui, “Coverage Enhancement by Deploying RIS
in 5G Commercial Mobile Networks: Field Trials,”IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 172–180,
2024.
[2] W. Chen, X. Lin, J. Lee, A. Toskala, S. Sun, C. F.
Chiasserini, and L. Liu, “5G-Advanced Toward 6G: Past,
Present, and Future,”IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1592–1619, 2023.
[3] S. F. Ahmed, M. S. B. Alam, S. Afrin, S. J. Rafa, S. B.
Taher, M. Kabir, S. M. Muyeen, and A. H. Gandomi,
“Toward a Secure 5G-Enabled Internet of Things: A
Survey on Requirements, Privacy, Security, Challenges,
and Opportunities,”IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 13 125–
13 145, 2024.
[4] R. Khan, P. Kumar, D. N. K. Jayakody, and M. Liyanage,
“A Survey on Security and Privacy of 5G Technologies:
Potential Solutions, Recent Advancements, and Future
Directions,”IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutori-
als, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 196–248, 2020.
[5] A. Mahmood, L. Beltramelli, S. Fakhrul Abedin, S. Zeb,
N. I. Mowla, S. A. Hassan, E. Sisinni, and M. Gidlund,
“Industrial IoT in 5G-and-Beyond Networks: Vision,
Architecture, and Design Trends,”IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4122–4137,
2022.
[6] C. Pan, H. Ren, K. Wang, J. F. Kolb, M. Elkashlan,
M. Chen, M. Di Renzo, Y . Hao, J. Wang, A. L. Swindle-
hurst, X. You, and L. Hanzo, “Reconfigurable Intelligent
Surfaces for 6G Systems: Principles, Applications, and
Research Directions,”IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 14–20, 2021.
[7] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A Vision of 6G
Wireless Systems: Applications, Trends, Technologies,
and Open Research Problems,”IEEE Network, vol. 34,
no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020.
[8] V . K. Quy, A. Chehri, N. M. Quy, N. D. Han, and N. T.
Ban, “Innovative Trends in the 6G Era: A Comprehensive
Survey of Architecture, Applications, Technologies, and
Challenges,”IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 39 824–39 844,
2023.
[9] C.-X. Wang, X. You, X. Gao, X. Zhu, Z. Li, C. Zhang,
H. Wang, Y . Huang, Y . Chen, H. Haas, J. S. Thompson,
E. G. Larsson, M. D. Renzo, W. Tong, P. Zhu, X. Shen,
H. V . Poor, and L. Hanzo, “On the Road to 6G: Visions,
Requirements, Key Technologies, and Testbeds,”IEEE
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 2,
pp. 905–974, 2023.
[10] Q. Wu and R. Zhang, “Towards Smart and Reconfig-
urable Environment: Intelligent Reflecting Surface Aided
Wireless Network,”IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 106–112, 2020.
[11] E. Basar, “Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface-Based In-
dex Modulation: A New Beyond MIMO Paradigm for
6G,”IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68,
no. 5, pp. 3187–3196, 2020.
[12] B. Di, H. Zhang, L. Song, Y . Li, Z. Han, and H. V .
Poor, “Hybrid Beamforming for Reconfigurable Intelli-
gent Surface based Multi-User Communications: Achiev-
able Rates With Limited Discrete Phase Shifts,”IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38,
no. 8, pp. 1809–1822, 2020.
[13] Y . Liu, X. Liu, X. Mu, T. Hou, J. Xu, M. Di Renzo,
and N. Al-Dhahir, “Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces:
Principles and Opportunities,”IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1546–1577,
2021.
13
[14] K. Cao and Y . Ji, “Rate maximization based on soft actor-
critic reset for RIS-assisted MU-MISO symbiotic radio
systems,”Applied Intelligence, vol. 55, no. 6, p. 375,
2025.
[15] H. Zhou, M. Erol-Kantarci, Y . Liu, and H. V . Poor,
“A Survey on Model-Based, Heuristic, and Machine
Learning Optimization Approaches in RIS-Aided Wire-
less Networks,”IEEE Communications Surveys and Tu-
torials, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 781–823, 2024.
[16] N. E. Houda Ouamane and H. Belhadef, “Deep Rein-
forcement Learning Applied to NLP: A Brief Survey,” in
2022 2nd International Conference on New Technologies
of Information and Communication (NTIC), 2022, pp. 1–
5.
[17] K. M. Faisal and W. Choi, “Machine Learning Ap-
proaches for Reconfigurable Intelligent Surfaces: A Sur-
vey,”IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 27 343–27 367, 2022.
[18] C. Pradhan, A. Li, L. Song, B. Vucetic, and Y . Li,
“Hybrid Precoding Design for Reconfigurable Intelligent
Surface Aided mmWave Communication Systems,”IEEE
Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9, no. 7, pp. 1041–
1045, 2020.
[19] M. Katwe, K. Singh, B. Clerckx, and C.-P. Li, “Rate
Splitting Multiple Access for Sum-Rate Maximization in
IRS Aided Uplink Communications,”IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2246–
2261, 2023.
[20] A. Li, L. Song, B. Vucetic, and Y . Li, “Interference
Exploitation Precoding for Reconfigurable Intelligent
Surface Aided Multi-User Communications With Direct
Links,”IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 9,
no. 11, pp. 1937–1941, 2020.
[21] J. Ye, S. Guo, and M.-S. Alouini, “Joint Reflecting and
Precoding Designs for SER Minimization in Reconfig-
urable Intelligent Surfaces Assisted MIMO Systems,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19,
no. 8, pp. 5561–5574, 2020.
[22] H. Guo, Y .-C. Liang, J. Chen, and E. G. Larsson,
“Weighted Sum-Rate Maximization for Reconfigurable
Intelligent Surface Aided Wireless Networks,”IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19, no. 5,
pp. 3064–3076, 2020.
[23] Z. Zhang and L. Dai, “A Joint Precoding Framework for
Wideband Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface-Aided Cell-
Free Network,”IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
vol. 69, pp. 4085–4101, 2021.
[24] S. Nassirpour, A. Vahid, D.-T. Do, and D. Bhara-
dia, “Beamforming Design in Reconfigurable Intelligent
Surface-Assisted IoT Networks Based on Discrete Phase
Shifters and Imperfect CSI,”IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 5301–5315, 2024.
[25] H. Niu, Z. Lin, Z. Chu, Z. Zhu, P. Xiao, H. X. Nguyen,
I. Lee, and N. Al-Dhahir, “Joint Beamforming Design
for Secure RIS-Assisted IoT Networks,”IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1628–1641, 2023.
[26] A. B. M. Adam, M. A. Ouamri, X. Wan, M. S. A.
Muthanna, R. Alkanhel, A. Muthanna, and X. Li, “Se-
cure Communication in UA VRIS-Empowered Multiuser
Networks: Joint Beamforming, Phase Shift, and UA V
Trajectory Optimization,”IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 1009–1019, 2024.
[27] X. Liu, Y . Yu, B. Peng, X. B. Zhai, Q. Zhu, and V . C. M.
Leung, “RIS-UA V Enabled Worst-Case Downlink Se-
crecy Rate Maximization for Mobile Vehicles,”IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 72, no. 5, pp.
6129–6141, 2023.
[28] N. Lin, C. Liu, T. Wu, A. Hawbani, L. Zhao, S. Wan,
and M. Guizani, “Green Communications: RIS-Assisted
Fixed-Wing UA V Coverage Scheme Based on Deep Re-
inforcement Learning,”IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 4115–4127, 2025.
[29] H. Luo, R. Liu, M. Li, and Q. Liu, “RIS-Aided Inte-
grated Sensing and Communication: Joint Beamforming
and Reflection Design,”IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 72, no. 7, pp. 9626–9630, 2023.
[30] J. Wang, S. Gong, Q. Wu, and S. Ma, “RIS-Aided
MIMO Systems With Hardware Impairments: Robust
Beamforming Design and Analysis,”IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 6914–
6929, 2023.
[31] X. Mu, Y . Liu, L. Guo, J. Lin, and R. Schober, “Si-
multaneously Transmitting and Reflecting (STAR) RIS
Aided Wireless Communications,”IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 3083–3098,
2022.
[32] J. Zuo, Y . Liu, Z. Ding, L. Song, and H. V . Poor, “Joint
Design for Simultaneously Transmitting and Reflecting
(STAR) RIS Assisted NOMA Systems,”IEEE Transac-
tions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp.
611–626, 2023.
[33] W. Du, Z. Chu, G. Chen, P. Xiao, Y . Xiao, X. Wu,
and W. Hao, “STAR-RIS Assisted Wireless Powered IoT
Networks,”IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 10 644–10 658, 2023.
[34] M. Chen, Z. Yang, W. Saad, C. Yin, H. V . Poor, and
S. Cui, “A Joint Learning and Communications Frame-
work for Federated Learning Over Wireless Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20,
no. 1, pp. 269–283, 2021.
[35] C. Jiang, H. Zhang, Y . Ren, Z. Han, K.-C. Chen,
and L. Hanzo, “Machine Learning Paradigms for Next-
Generation Wireless Networks,”IEEE Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 98–105, 2017.
[36] S. K. Das, F. Benkhelifa, Y . Sun, H. Abumarshoud, Q. H.
Abbasi, M. A. Imran, and L. Mohjazi, “Comprehen-
sive review on ML-based RIS-enhanced IoT systems:
basics, research progress and future challenges,”Com-
puter Networks, vol. 224, p. 109581, 2023. [Online].
Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1389128623000269
[37] R. Zhong, Y . Liu, X. Mu, Y . Chen, and L. Song,
“AI Empowered RIS-Assisted NOMA Networks: Deep
Learning or Reinforcement Learning?”IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 1, pp.
182–196, 2022.
[38] Q. Liu, Y . Zhu, M. Li, R. Liu, Y . Liu, and Z. Lu, “DRL-
14
Based Secrecy Rate Optimization for RIS-Assisted Se-
cure ISAC Systems,”IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 16 871–16 875, 2023.
[39] X. Xu, Z. Meng, J. Zhang, S. Han, B. Wang, M. Sun,
W. Wang, and P. Zhang, “Learning-Based Deterministic
Delay Performance Guarantee Strategy in RIS-Assisted
Communication Networks,”IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 1907–1921, 2025.
[40] H. Zhang, M. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Wang, N. Wang,
and K. Long, “Capacity Maximization in RIS-UA V
Networks: A DDQN-Based Trajectory and Phase Shift
Optimization Approach,”IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2583–2591, 2023.
[41] J. Xu, B. Ai, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Toward Interference
Suppression: RIS-Aided High-Speed Railway Networks
via Deep Reinforcement Learning,”IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 4188–
4201, 2023.
[42] C. Huang, R. Mo, and C. Yuen, “Reconfigurable Intel-
ligent Surface Assisted Multiuser MISO Systems Ex-
ploiting Deep Reinforcement Learning,”IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 38, no. 8,
pp. 1839–1850, 2020.
[43] H. Chu and G. Xiao, “DRL-based Distributed Reconfig-
urable Intelligent Surfaces-Aided mmWave Communica-
tions,” in2024 6th International Conference on Natural
Language Processing (ICNLP), 2024, pp. 680–686.
[44] L. Li, Y . Yang, L. Bao, Z. Gao, Y . Wu, and H. Xiang,
“Deep Reinforcement Learning-Based Downlink Beam-
forming and Phase Optimization for RIS-Aided Commu-
nication System,”IEEE Wireless Communications Let-
ters, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 2263–2267, 2023.
[45] K. M. Faisal, Y . Kim, and W. Choi, “Twin-Delayed
DDPG-Based Multiuser Downlink Transmissions for
RIS-Aided Wireless Communications,”IEEE Sensors
Journal, vol. 24, no. 19, pp. 31 215–31 227, 2024.
[46] J. Xu, B. Ai, L. Wu, Y . Zhang, W. Wang, and H. Li,
“Deep Reinforcement Learning for Computation Rate
Maximization in RIS-Enabled Mobile Edge Computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 73,
no. 7, pp. 10 862–10 866, 2024.
[47] J. Liu, J. Wang, and Y . Zhang, “RIS Assisted Millimeter
Wave Communication with Imperfect CSI Based on
DRL,” in2024 9th International Conference on Com-
puter and Communication Systems (ICCCS), 2024, pp.
599–604.
[48] M. Wu, K. Guo, Z. Lin, X. Li, K. An, and Y . Huang,
“Joint Optimization Design of RIS-Assisted Hybrid FSO
SAGINs Using Deep Reinforcement Learning,”IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 73, no. 3, pp.
3025–3040, 2024.
[49] K. Guo, M. Wu, X. Li, H. Song, and N. Ku-
mar, “Deep Reinforcement Learning and NOMA-Based
Multi-Objective RIS-Assisted IS-UA V-TNs: Trajectory
Optimization and Beamforming Design,”IEEE Trans-
actions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 24,
no. 9, pp. 10 197–10 210, 2023.