Data assimilation and discrepancy modeling with
shallow recurrent decoders
Yuxuan Bao∗, J. Nathan Kutz∗,†
∗Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
December 2, 2025
Abstract
The requirements of modern sensing are rapidly evolving, driven by increasing demands for data
efficiency, real-time processing, and deployment under limited sensing coverage. Complex physical sys-
tems are often characterized through the integration of a limited number of point sensors in combination
with scientific computations which approximate the dominant, full-state dynamics. Simulation models,
however, inevitably neglect small-scale or hidden processes, are sensitive to perturbations, or oversim-
plify parameter correlations, leading to reconstructions that often diverge from the reality measured
by sensors. This creates a critical need for data assimilation, the process of integrating observational
data with predictive simulation models to produce coherent and accurate estimates of the full state of
complex physical systems. We propose a machine learning framework for Data Assimilation with a SHal-
low REcurrent Decoder (DA-SHRED) which bridges the simulation-to-real (SIM2REAL) gap between
computational modeling and experimental sensor data. For real-world physics systems modeling high-
dimensional spatiotemporal fields, where the full state cannot be directly observed and must be inferred
from sparse sensor measurements, we leverage the latent space learned from a reduced simulation model
via SHRED, and update these latent variables using real sensor data to accurately reconstruct the full
system state. Furthermore, our algorithm incorporates a sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics
(SINDy) based regression model in the latent space to identify functionals corresponding to missing dy-
namics in the simulation model. We demonstrate that DA-SHRED successfully closes the SIM2REAL
gap and additionally recovers missing dynamics in highly complex systems, demonstrating that the com-
bination of efficient temporal encoding and physics-informed correction enables robust data assimilation
under sparse sensing constraints.
1 Introduction
Data-driven science and engineering is being revolutionized by advancements in machine learning and AI
algorithms [1]. Leveraging sensor measurements, often in combination with scientific computation proxies,
such algorithms aim to learn effective models for a diversity of downstream tasks, including reconstruction,
forecasting, and control in challenging environments that include noisy measurements and or parametric
variability. A grand challenge in the deployment of such algorithms is the fact that many physical systems are
not amenable to full state measurements, but rather only discrete point sensor measurements at prescribed
and limited locations. In fact, the only knowledge of the full state space is typically approximated by
simulations of the underlying governing equations which are often given by partial differential equations
(PDEs). For example, our knowledge of the full dynamics of nuclear reactors, plasma physics, rocket engines,
and many complex flow fields has only been estimated and/or constructed by simulation proxies. Some
nuclear reactors, for instance, are modeled by up to 20 coupled PDEs that detail the complex interactions
between the fluid dynamics, thermodynamics, ion concentrations, etc [2]. None of the 20 fields have been
measured in practice in deployed reactors. Rather, in reality only one or two of the fields (e.g. temperature,
pressure) can be measured at discrete point sensor locations on the walls of the reactor. This presents a
significant modeling challenge for closing the simulation-to-reality (SIM2REAL) gap [3, 4], especially as the
1
arXiv:2512.01170v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
(a) Simulation
Real Physics:
·u=N(u,x,t)Model
Data
Sensors
S=[s1 s2 … sm]∈ℝp×m
(p≪n)
·u′ =M(u′ ,x,t)Model
DataX′ = | | |u′ 1 u′ 2 … u′ m| | | ∈ℝn×m
Unobserved Observed
S′ =[s′ 1 s′ 2 … s′ m]∈ℝ(p+q)×m
X= | | |u1 u2 … um| | | ∈ℝn×m
SHRED
˜X
(b) Train on Simulation
(c) Deploy on Real Sensors
˜X′ 
X′ −truth
Update to reality
Figure 1: The algorithmic structure of the DA-SHRED structure. With real physics unobserved, the model exploits
the latent space trained on known simulation data using traditional SHRED network, and deploys it on real sensor
data to close the discrepancy. It is assumed that the full state-space of the real physics is never observed in practice.
The variables, data and models are summarized in the figure table 2.
PDEs we simulate often poorly approximate the real physics of such complex systems. Using the recently
developed SHallow REcurrent Decoder (SHRED) architecture [5, 6, 7], we demonstrate a data-driven method
for (i) updating a SHRED model to reality when trained only on simulations and (ii) additionally learning
the missing physics of the simulation proxy. Our data assimilation SHRED (DA-SHRED) thus provides
an effective algorithm for closing the SIM2REAL gap in many complex systems, as demonstrated in the
challenging examples presented here which include applications in rocket engines, chemical reactors and
turbulent flows.
Data assimilation has become the leading method for closing the SIM2REAL gap across science and
engineering [8], with extensive theoretical and computational developments over the past two decades [9,
10]. Based upon Kalman filtering, data assimilation is potentially one of the most useful and broadly
deployed data-driven modeling technique available today as we are rarely without access to some underlying
governing equations or without experimental measurements. By assuming that both the model used and
the measurements acquired have known error distributions, ensemble Kalman filtering methods [11, 12] can
be used to generate optimal statistical predictions. Weather forecasting has been revolutionized by data
assimilation, with state-of-the-art methods like the 4DVAR architecture [13, 14] providing a remarkable
improvement in our modern forecasting capabilities. Data assimilation, however, does not typically use the
SIM2REAL mismatch to learn updates to the underlying model. Thus the SIM2REAL gap often persists.
Discrepancy modeling for dynamic systems [15, 16, 17] attempts to address this issue by using the SIM2REAL
gap to propose updates to the underlying model in order to correct the physics towards reality. Discrepancy
modeling is thus driven by sensor measurements which are a direct assessment of reality modulo noise or bias
in the measurements. A challenge for both data assimilation and discrepancy modeling is that simulations
allow access to all variables at all spatial and temporal points of a computational mesh or grid. In contrast,
discrete temporal measurements of reality are typically only acquired at a limited number of spatial positions,
and typically only a subset of the variables are actually observed. Thus the goal of updating the underlying
PDE (governing equations) is exceptionally challenging, with only limited methods proposed thus far.
The DA-SHRED algorithm proposed here, illustrated in Fig. 1, is based upon the SHRED architecture [5,
2
Simulation Reality
State Space
Sensor Data
Data Matrix
Sensor Matrix
Sampling Matrix
Governing Equations
Eigenvalue Problem (linear)
uk=u(x,tk)∈ℝn×1 u′ k=u′ (x,tk)∈ℝn×1
sk=Muk∈ℝp×1 s′ k∈ℝp×1
X=[u1u2⋯up]∈ℝn×m X′ =[u′ 1u′ 2⋯u′ p]∈ℝn×m
S=[s1s2⋯sp]∈ℝp×m S′ =[s′ 1s′ 2⋯s′ p]∈ℝ(p+q)×m
M∈ℝp×n
ut=Lu orut=N(u,x,t) u′ t=(L+L′ )u′ oru′ t=M(u′ ,x,t)
Lψn=λnψn (L+L′ )ψ′ n=λ′ nψ′ n
Figure 2: Summary of variables, data and models used in the DA-SHRED formulation. The state space is of
dimension n, there are m snapshots of temporal measurements using p sensors for SHRED training with an additional
q sensors deployed in reality.
6, 7] which leverages three key mathematical concepts: (i) the separation of variables, (ii) Takens embed-
ding theorem, and (iii) a decoding only strategy. Separation of variables is the foundation of many analytic
solutions techniques for solving PDEs and it has been deployed as the infrastructure for numerical time
stepping methods for PDEs. Takens’ embedding theorem states that the time-history information at a single
measurement location can provide a diffeomorphic representation of the entire state-space of a dynamical
system. With modern machine learning, this diffeomorphism can be learned with training data. Finally, the
decoding only strategy avoids the ill-conditioned learning of inverse operators required of standard autoen-
coder/decoder pairs. In combination, they provide SHRED with a robust framework for sensing [5], model
reduction [6], and physics discovery [7]. The innovations presented here leverage the SHRED architecture to
not only close the SIM2REAL gap, but to also learn the missing physics in the original simulations. SHRED
is trained initially on the simulation data, and then updated by the acquisition of temporal sensor data
deployed on the real physical system. This gives an optimization pathway for updating the weights of the
DA-SHRED model trained on simulation to minimize the error between the sensors observations and the
SHRED predictions at the sensor locations. In addition to minimizing the SIM2REAL error, the updated
DA-SHRED model can then be used to estimate the missing physics terms which are responsible for the
error in the SIM2REAL gap. Specifically, the latent space of the DA-SHRED architecture is embedded with
a sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics (SINDy) [18, 19] loss functional in order to extract the parsi-
monious missing physics from a library of potential candidate terms. Thus we propose a 2-stage scheme for
both data assimilation and discrepancy modeling. The success of the method is demonstrated on a number
of challenging models that include the 2D Kuramoto-Sivanshinsky equations, the 2D Kolmogorov flow, the
2D Gray-Scott reaction-diffusion equations, and a rotating detonation engine example. In each case, the
DA-SHRED is shown to be effective in closing the SIM2REAL gap and learning the missing physics. The
algorithm is further robust to noise, requires only minimal training data, and can be trained in a compressive
framework which allows for efficient laptop level computing.
2 The Data-Assimilation SHRED (DA-SHRED) Architecture
The overall goal is to close the SIM2REAL gap using the underlying SHRED architecture [5]. Specifically,
can we formally show that this can be done under suitable assumptions outlined here. Thus given simulation
data X for training a SHRED model, can we estimate the full state-space of real data X′ given only limited
3
point sensor measurements of reality S′. Or more formally:
input: X , S′
output: X ′
Or more precisely, we want a model mapping reality measurements to reality full-state estimates
X′ = Fθ(S′) (1)
where we will learn a neural network model F with weights θ from training on simulation data X and
updating it to match reality at the p + q sensors deployed in reality. Additionally, we can also perform the
following discrepancy modeling task with the DA-SHRED architecture:
input: X , S′
output: X ′, L′
Thus we not only update the simulation to reality by learning Fθ, but we also explicitly learn the missing
physics term L′ using the SINDy method [18, 16].
2.1 Linear, constant coefficient PDEs
For this case, we can explicitly compute how the DA-SHRED architecture is able to update the model to
data. The dynamics of the linear PDE model approximating reality are given by the governing equations
ut = Lu (2)
with some specified boundary conditions. Note that we don’t actually know the evolution equations for u′.
For constant coefficient operator L and the corresponding reality model L + L′ (See Fig. 2), solutions can
be easily calculated via separation of variables (approximated with N modes) so that
u =
NX
n=1
anψn exp(λnt) (3)
and
u′ =
NX
n=1
a′
nψ′
n exp(λ′
nt). (4)
The problem: we don’t actually know the triplet a′
n, ψ′
n, λ′
n since we don’t know L′. It was shown in [6] that
we can solve the sensor boundary value problem (SBVP) using point measurements and time trajectories at
arbitrary sensor locations to uniquely determine the an in (3). This is instead of of the standard initial value
problem (IBVP) which requires the entire state-space be known at a given instance of time for solving the
PDE and determining the an.
Assuming that the solution of (5) can be approximated by the basis of (3), the solution for u′ is instead
given by:
u′ =
NX
n=1
a′
nψn exp(λ′
nt). (5)
Then we would use S′ to update the simulation values to reality by computing a′
n and λ′
n from these
measurements. As shown in [6], this can be done with simple linear algebra. Thus the SIM2REAL gap can
be shown to be explicitly closed for linear, constant coefficient PDEs provided a common basis is sufficient
for the approximation.
This gives a theoretical construct for understanding how the DA-SHRED architecture works. Additional
complexity arises for nonlinear PDEs. If they are weakly nonlinear PDEs, then under mild assumptions,
the above arguments hold perturbatively. For strongly nonlinear dynamics, DA-SHRED is enacted compu-
tationally to show that the arguments above hold. This will be shown in the four challenging examples of
this paper. Importantly, the underlying assumption in all these cases is that the learned decoder bases of
4
the simulation remain a good approximation basis for real physics. Otherwise, updating the bases to reality
also needs to be considered.
As a final point, we highlight how the missing physics is found. This is done by using a SINDy regression
to model the missing physics [18, 15, 16]:
L′ = Θξ (6)
where Θ is the library of candidate functions and ξ is the loading vector which is required to be sparse.
We should be easily able to do this as this is directly related to what has been done previously for learning
discrepancy terms [15, 16].
As noted previously, if the basis representation shifts significantly between the simulation model and
reality, then the decoder must be updated to more accurately represent the reality basis modes. This
remains challenging to do as there are no measurements for the reality modes, only a limited number of
point measurements. Thus the DA-SHRED model has no capability of modeling this out-of-distribution
data. This is beyond the scope of the current work. However, in the models considered here, the assumption
of using the basis learned from the simulation data appears to be sufficient to give highly accurate models.
2.2 Port-Hamiltonian Systems
Port-Hamiltonian systems (PHS) are a framework for modeling physical dynamics that exhibit energy con-
servation, interconnection and dissipation structures. Originating from classical Hamiltonian mechanics,
PHS models have been formalized largely in the past two decades as an extension for modeling interactions,
dissipation and enabling control inputs.
The input-state-output PHS, with no constraint on the state space variables, is typically represented in
terms of the following equation[20]:
˙x = (J(x) − R(x))∂H
∂x + g(x)u
And the output equation is:
y = gT (x)∂H
∂x
where u and y are input–output pairs, H(x) is a Hamiltonian function, J(x) is skew-symmetric ( JT (x) =
−J(x)), R(x) is a symmetric positive semi-definite dissipation matrix ( R(x) = RT (x) ≥ 0) that specifies a
resistive structure, and g is the input matrix.
Theorem 1 (Persistence of PHS form under natural perturbations). Let (17) be a PHS on a simply connected
domain X. Consider perturbations ∆J, ∆R, ∆G (matrix fields) and a 1-form perturbation δ so that the
perturbed dynamics are
˙x =
 
(J + ∆J) − (R + ∆R)
 
∇H + δ

+ (G + ∆G)u.
Assume:
1. ∆J is skew-symmetric on X,
2. ∆R is symmetric and small enough on compact subsets to keep R + ∆R ⪰ 0,
3. δ is closed: dδ = 0 on X.
Then there exists eH = H + ε with dε = δ and
eJ := J + ∆J, eR := R + ∆R, eG := G + ∆G
such that the perturbed system can be written globally in PHS form
˙x = ( eJ − eR)∇ eH + eG u.
5
simulation real physics DA-SHRED
t=12
t=15
L′ = {(u, ∇u)} L′ = {(u, ∇u, ∇3u)}
(a) (b) (c)
(d)
Figure 3: The result of 2D damped Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation. Figures on the same row are taken at the
same timestep. The left column (a) represents the undamped simulation model (2D KS equation without damping);
the middle column (b) represents unknown real physics (2D KS equation with damping); and the right column (c)
represents state space restored by DA-SHRED. The error for the DA-SHRED correction to reality is shown in (d)
where an order of magnitute improvement in accuracy is achieved within T = 20.
In an eigenspace-preserving PHS, the evolution of the dynamics is maintained within a specific decompo-
sition of the state space. Such invariant could be useful in multiple fields including structured mechanical[21],
electrical[22], or fluid [23] systems where distinct eigenmodes are expected under the PHS structure. In prac-
tice, the preservation of eigenspaces in port-Hamiltonian systems often involves the careful design ofJ and R
matrices, such that the transformation follows the spectral properties of the Hamiltonian [24]. Importantly,
the PHS is a broad class of systems for which the decocder space is preserved and invariant. Thus training
DA-SHRED on PHS allows the decoder to discover an approximation of the invaraiant space.
3 Results
DA-SHRED provides an effective algorithm for closing the SIM2REAL gap in many complex physical sys-
tems, as demonstrated in the challenging examples presented here which include applications in rocket
engines, chemical reactors and turbulent flows. These examples generalize the underlying theory presented
in the preceding section and establish the effectiveness of the algorithm on highly nontrivial spatio-temporal
systems.
3.1 2D damped Kuramoto–Sivashinsky equation
The first example considered is the 2D version of the damped Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (2DKS) equation [25,
26]. The KS equation is one of the simplest canonical PDE models that produces spatio-temporal chaos.
It models a wide range of phenomena including instabilities of a laminar flame fronts, the dynamics of thin
liquid films on inclined plane, and trapped-ion instabilities in a plasma. The typical 2DKS, whose dynamics
are illustrated in Fig. 3, is given by the evolution equation
ut + 1
2|∇u|2 + ∇2u + ν∇4u = 0. (7)
We assume this to be our model of reality. However, the true physics in our example will be given by a
damped version of the 2DKS [27] which is given by
u′
t + 1
2|∇u′|2 + ∇2u′ + ν∇4u′ + (v · ∇)u′ − γu′ = 0 (8)
6
with the additional damping term ( v · ∇)u′ − γu′. These additional terms represent the discrepancy from
reality that must be learned in order to produce an effective model for prediction and characterization. Thus
DA-SHRED must first learn how to map from u to u′ before eventually learning the additional damping
terms. Without loss of generality, we set the parameter ν = 1. Figure 3 exhibits the 2D evolution at times
t = 12 and t = 15 on a domain of size x ∈ [0, 64] × y ∈ [0, 64]. The panels display the true physics (20)
(middle panels (b)) in comparison with the simulation of presumed reality (7) (left panels (a)) and the
DA-SHRED improvement to reality (right panels (c)). Importantly, not only does the DA-SHRED close
the SIM2REAL gap, but it does so in almost real time as shown by the red error plot in the right panel
(d) of Fig. 3. In contrast, the simulation model approximating reality continues to diverge from the true
dynamics as shown by the blue error curve. The behavior exhibited for the 2DKS is representative of all the
other models considered here, i.e. the DA-SHRED architecture can be deployed to quickly update the model
predictions and close the SIM2REAL gap. Specifially, within a short evolution window, the DA-SHRED
closes the SIM2REAL gap by approximately an order of magnitude in the error. And as will be shown in
the next section, the DA-SHRED architecture further allows for learning of the unknown discrepancy term
of reality L′. This will be discussed in the algorithms of the next section.
3.2 2D Kolmogorov flow
In the second example we consider the two-dimensional (2D) Kolmogorov flow, which is a canonical model in
fluid dynamics. Originally introduced by Arnold and Meshalkin in the 1960s to study hydrodynamic stability
under periodic forcing [28, 29]. It is governed by the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations subject to a
sinusoidal body force, typically expressed as f(x, y) = F sin(ky) ˆx, which induces a laminar base flow that
can lose stability as the Reynolds number increases. Despite its conceptual simplicity, the 2D Kolmogorov
flow exhibits a rich spectrum of dynamical behaviors, including secondary instabilities, chaotic attractors,
and quasi-periodic motion [30]. These features make it an ideal platform for investigating the mechanisms
underlying turbulence transition and the emergence of coherent structures in two-dimensional flows [31, 32].
The system’s fully periodic boundary conditions and analytically tractable base state allow detailed numerical
and theoretical studies of bifurcation sequences and energy transfer across scales [32, 33]. More recent work
has employed the Kolmogorov flow as a benchmark for reduced-order modeling, instability analysis, and
prediction of extreme events such as rogue waves [34].
In what follows, the 2D Kolmogorov flow is used as a fundamental testbed for understanding the per-
formance of DA-SHRED. Our simulation model is a 2D Navier–Stokes equation with Kolmogorov forcing,
which is given by
∂u
∂t + u · ∇u + ∇p = ν∇2u + F,
∇ ·u = 0
(9)
where u is a two-dimensional velocity field, with pressure p, forcing F and viscosity ν = 1
Re
. Reformulated
in terms of vorticity ω = ∇ ×u, the governing equation can be rewritten as [35]
∂ω
∂t + u · ∇ω = ν∇2ω + f,
∇u = 0
(10)
This gives a model of idealized 2D Kolmogorov flow. The true physics is similarly assumed to be a damped
version of the 2D Kolmogorov flow, given by
∂ω′
∂t + u′ · ∇ω′ + αω′ = ν∇2ω′ + f,
∇u′ = 0
(11)
with ν = 0.01, linear damping coefficient α = 0.12, and f = µ sin(y) where µ is the forcing amplitude.
Figure 4 exhibits the 2D Kolmogorov evolution of the x and y components of velocity (top and bottom
panels respectively) on the domain x ∈ [0, 64] × y ∈ [0, 64] for times t = 30 and t = 35. As displayed
previously, the panels show the true physics (11) (middle panels (b)) in comparison with the simulation of
presumed reality (10) (left panels (a)) and the DA-SHRED improvement to reality (right panels (c)). As
7
simulation real physics DA-SHRED
t=35.0
t=30.0
L′ = {(ω)} L′ = {(ω, ω∇2ω)}
Figure 4: The result of 2D damped Kolmogorov flow. Figures on the same row are taken at the same timestep. The
left column represents the undamped simulation model (2D Kolmogorov flow without damping); the middle column
represents unknown real physics (2D Kolmogorov flow with linear damping); and the right column represents state
space restored by DA-SHRED.
with the 2DKS, not only does the DA-SHRED close the SIM2REAL gap, but it does so in almost real time
as shown by the error plot in the right panel (d) of Fig. 4. The error plots show the short-time and long-time
decay of the error as the DA-SHRED continues to refine the solution approximation to reality.
It is important to emphasize that achieving the strong DA-SHRED restoration performance in this
example required a relatively larger number of randomly placed sensors ( p + q = 20) for the real physics
to adequately span the state space. By contrast, the simulation model is more forgiving - a conventional
SHRED architecture can often reconstruct the full state space using only a few sensors ( p = 3), since the
simulation is self-consistent and lacks the SIM2REAL discrepancies presented in real physics.
When the number of sensors in the real physical system is low, it is still possible to match the sensor
measurements reasonably well. However, this is often achieved through a reformulation of the latent space,
which produces a low loss at the sensor level but can correspond to major differences in the full-field restora-
tion. One potential source of these discrepancies is the nontrivial transient stage of the system - the SHRED
may overfit to the transient behavior captured by the sensors, or conversely overfit to steady-state patterns,
depending on which phase dominates the limited sensor data. Critically, because the true physical state
remains unobserved at the state-space level in our problem setting, there is no straightforward way to detect
these discrepancies. In other words, insufficient sensors may lead not only to inaccurate discrepancy models
but also to a false sense of confidence, since standard sensor-based metrics may appear acceptable.
Increasing the number of excess sensors q therefore plays a crucial role in closing the SIM2REAL gap.
In practice, additional sensors provide broader coverage of state-space regions where the system exhibits
relatively silent or weakly active dynamics, such as during nontrivial transient stages. By including these
regions in the sensor set, the SHRED is less likely to overfit to specific patterns in the active transients,
reducing latent-space misalignment and improving the robustness of full-field restoration. In this experiment,
8
simulation real physics DA-SHRED
L′ = {(U2V )} L′ = {(U2V, V3)}
L′ = {(V 2)} L′ = {(V 2, UV, V3)}
Figure 5: The result of 2D damped Grey Scott model. The left figure represent the undamped simulation model;
the right one represents the real model and the bottom one represents the DA-SHRED result towards convergence.
the total number of sensors could be further reduced ( p + q = 10) with additional strategies - for example,
with prior knowledge about the transition from transient to steady-state behavior together with reweighting
techniques that prioritize steady-state patterns.
It is worth noting that in the 2D Kuramoto–Sivashinsky equation studied above, the transient stage
was relatively silent, and thus the DA-SHRED architecture was less sensitive to sensor placement. In more
general systems, however, transient dynamics can be highly nontrivial, and without prior knowledge of when
the flow transitions to a steady-state, one must rely on a denser sensor network to ensure reliable restoration.
In these cases, increasing the number of sensors deployed for real physics(q) is a practical safeguard to capture
the latent dynamics and close the gap for SIM2REAL discrepancies.
3.3 2D reaction-diffusion system
The third example we consider is the two-dimensional (2D) Gray–Scott reaction–diffusion model, which is a
prototypical system for studying pattern formation and spatiotemporal dynamics in nonlinear chemical and
biological systems. Originally derived as a simplified representation of autocatalytic chemical reactions [36],
the model describes the interaction between two chemical species, U and V , undergoing local reactions and
diffusive transport. The governing equations take the form
∂U
∂t = Du∇2U − UV 2 + F(1 − U), ∂V
∂t = Dv∇2V + UV 2 − (F + k)V (12)
where Du and Dv are diffusion coefficients, while F and k represent feed and removal rates, respectively.
Depending on parameter choices and initial conditions, the Gray–Scott model exhibits a wide variety of
self-organized patterns — including spots, stripes, labyrinths, and oscillatory structures [37, 38]. It has since
become a canonical system for exploring nonlinear instabilities, Turing mechanisms, and pattern formation
9
in reaction–diffusion dynamics [39, 40, 41, 42]. The simplicity and rich phenomenology of the Gray–Scott
equations make them an essential benchmark for numerical experiments, data assimilation, and reduced-order
modeling of spatiotemporal processes [43]
The true physics is similarly a damped version of it, given by
∂U ′
∂t = Du′∇2U′ − U′V ′2 − αV ′2 + F(1 − U′), ∂V ′
∂t = Dv′∇2V ′ + U′V ′2 − (F + k)V ′ (13)
with damping coefficient α, and f, k are feed and kill rates, respectively. Simulation results for this are given
by the top rows of Fig. 5. As before, the real physics for U and V is given by the middle row of panels,
the left panels are our simulation of reality, and the right panels are the DA-SHRED updates with the error
curves given in the far right.
In a second discrepancy modeling experiment, we make the damping term a functional involving both
parameters as following
∂U ′
∂t = Du′∇2U′ − U′V ′2 − βU ′2V ′ + F(1 − U′) ∂V ′
∂t = Dv′∇2V ′ + U′V ′2 − (F + k)V ′ (14)
with damping coefficient β, and f, k are feed and kill rates, respectively. The results of this SIM2REAL
gap and the ability of DA-SHRED to close the gap is given in Fig. 5 (bottom panels). Consistent with the
previous case, the middle panels show the true dynamics of U and V , the left panels present our simulated
result, and the right panels depict the DA-SHRED reconstructions with corresponding error curves in the
outermost column.
3.4 Rotating Detonation Engines (RDEs)
Over recent decades, the concept of rotating detonation engines has emerged as a pathway towards realizing
pressure-gain combustion for propulsion and power-generation systems. Unlike conventional deflagration-
based combustion, which proceeds subsonically at nearly constant pressure, RDEs sustain supersonic det-
onation fronts that continuously propagate in the azimuthal direction of an annular combustor. It enables
rapid and efficient energy release, offering potential improvements in thermal efficiency and specific impulse
compared with constant-pressure Brayton-cycle engines. [44]
The applications of RDEs has been most prominently investigated for aerospace applications, especially
air-breathing and rocket propulsion systems. In rocket propulsion, RDEs have demonstrated the capacity
to improve specific impulse and reduce propellant consumption due to their inherently higher stagnation
pressures compared to conventional combustors. In air-breathing engines, they offer compact architectures
with reduced turbomachinery requirements and enhanced fuel efficiency [45]. Moreover, RDEs are also being
explored for stationary power generation, particularly as a means of improving gas-turbine cycle performance
and reducing fuel consumption [46].
The modeling of RDEs requires capturing the coupled dynamics of compressible flow, shock propagation,
and chemical reactions within an annular channel [48, 49, 50]. Such coupled processes have been analyzed in
both experimental and numerical studies of RDEs, revealing the intricate interplay between detonation fronts
and the reacting flow field [51, 52] and showing a diverse range of bifurcations and instabilities [50] that are
characteristic of damp-driven systems [53]. These processes occur over disparate spatial and temporal scales,
where detonation fronts propagate at supersonic speeds while chemical reactions and mixing evolve on much
smaller scales. The interaction between the detonation front, the unsteady flow field, and the continuous
injection of reactants produces strong pressure and temperature gradients that challenge conventional steady-
state or quasi-one-dimensional assumptions [54]. Even simplified flow geometries exhibit complex wave
structures. As discussed in recent thermodynamic analyses of RDE [49], the inherently transient nature
of detonation waves and their sensitivity to boundary conditions, injector dynamics, and heat release make
numerical modeling both computationally demanding and physically intricate. Accurately representing these
multi-physics couplings is therefore essential to predict the thermodynamic trends, stability, and efficiency of
RDE operation. To reduce this complexity while retaining the essential detonation dynamics, the following
simplified 1D model is considered, which captures the primary propagation behavior of the detonation front.
10
simulation real physics DA-SHRED
L′ = {(u, u3)} L′ = {(u, u3, λ2u)}
L′ = {(u)} L′ = {(u)}
Figure 6: The annotated figure on the left is from Koch’s et al [47] depicting the canonical flowfield of the Rotating
Detonation Engine. The figures on the right depict DA-SHRED result of 1D damped RDE model. One simulation
model is deployed on two different real physics settings, and the rightmost column represents the corresponding
two DA-SHRED results towards convergence. The RMSE of the simulation model versus the DA-SHRED model is
provided on the bottom left.
∂u
∂t + u∂u
∂x = q k(1 − λ)e
u−uc
α − ϵu2 (15a)
∂λ
∂t = k(1 − λ)e
u−uc
α − β(u, up, s)λ (15b)
The first equation describes energy input output and the second equation describes gain depletion and
recovery, where up is the injection threshold parameter and β(u, up, s) = sup
1+er(u−up) .
Data assimilation problems with RDEs are often difficult because the state estimations have to contend
with the highly nonlinear, discontinuous, and transient nature of detonation waves. Even for the simplified
simulation model, the PDEs are not only nonlinear but also extremely sensitive to initial and boundary
conditions. The presence of steep gradients at the detonation front further challenges our ability to close
the gap between simulation and reality as slight errors can easily propogate and lead to different modes and
instabilities. Therefore, data assimilation must not only correct the evolving state but also converge on the
inferrence of the damping parameters. Parameter estimation in such nonlinear, stiff systems are notoriously
unstable.
In this example, we use the above system of equations as the simulation model, while the real physics
is a damped version. We explored three different damping scenarios, given by adding a diffusive effect on
overall energy, perturbing the gain depletion, and perturbing the energy output. The true physics model we
construct is the following governing set of equations
∂u′
∂t + u′ ∂u′
∂x = q k(1 − λ′)e
u′−u′
c
α − ϵu′2 + ϵ2(u′ − u′3) (16a)
∂λ′
∂t = k(1 − λ′)e
u′−u′
c
α − β(u′, u′
p, s)λ′. (16b)
11
Figure 7: The full list of missing terms L′ in real physics compared to our DA-SHRED restoration L′ for the
experiments outlined in the previous section. The two columns illustrating the recovery highlight the trade-off
between targeting the reduction of RMSE (middle column) and sparsity (right column). With an unknown L′, a
balance between RMSE and sparsity must be hyper-parameter tuned for the best discrepancy model.
Simulations of reality and the computational model are given in Fig. 6 for two different discrepancy models.
Figure 6 shows how the DA-SHRED model can successfully track the detonation front without delays
while keeping the conservation structure of the governing equations. When distortions are not too strong and
abrupt, perturbations of different kinds can be reconciled well with the data assimilation model. As before,
the real physics for U (red line) and λ (blue line) are given by the middle row of panels, the left panels are
our simulation of reality, and the right panels are the DA-SHRED updates with the error curves given in the
bottom left. As illustrated in every model considered, the DA-SHRED quickly lowers the SIM2REAL error
by an order of magnitude as data is collected.
4 Discrepancy Modeling with DA-SHRED
In the DA framework introduced above, the SIM2REAL gap is modeled as the discrepancy between the
simulation model ut = N(u, x, t), which captures the approximate governing physics, and the real, unknown
dynamics u′
t = M(u′, x, t) = N(u′, x, t) + L′(u′, x, t), where L′ denotes a small, state-space dependent
perturbation term that encodes the unknown or unresolved physics. While the data assimilation step reduces
the effective mismatch between the two systems, it does not in itself provide the explicit functional structure
of the missing physics. Recovering the exact form of the missing functional terms L′ remains an open inverse
problem. To address this challenge, we present below two SINDy-based [18] algorithms that augment the
DA-SHRED framework and aim to identify the unknown terms directly from SIM2REAL trajectories by
sparse regression (6).
In practical settings, the recovery of L′ has an inherent trade-off between predictive accuracy and struc-
tural sparsity. As shown in the original SINDy formulation [18], models that achieve extremely low prediction
error often do so by selecting additional terms in the library to lower RMSE, effectively over-parameterizing
the dynamics. Similarly, the DA-SHRED model that minimizes RMSE tends to incorporate additional can-
didate functions - reflecting noise, numerical artifacts, or overfitting to uninformative directions - resulting
in expressions that may deviate from the true physical process. However, identifying the stopping point
for sparsification remains challenging, as excessive sparsity risks eliminating essential operators, whereas
12
Algorithm 1 Compressed search SINDy
Input:
A simulation model ˙u = N(u, x, t)
A multivariate time-series of simulation state space {ui}m
i=1 and corresponding sensor measurements of the
system {si}m
i=1
A multivariate time-series of real state space {u′
i}m
i=1 and corresponding sensor measurements of the system
{s′
i}m
i=1
A DA-SHRED architecture G({s′
i}t
i=t−k; WR) = T (G({si}t
i=t−k; WS); WT ) and a shallow decoder F for
restoration from the compressed latent space
A library of functional candidates Θ = {θj}n
j=1
Algorithm:
At time step t, perform the following
Generate ˜u′
t = F(G({s′
i}t
i=t−k; WR)) of the current restored real state space
Compute ˜u′
t,j = ˜u′
t−1,j + (N(˜u′
t−1,j, x, t) + θj(˜u′
t−1,j, x, t))dt of perturbed state space
Acquire proxies in the latent space using the trained SHRED model Gt( ˙u) = G(˜u′
t; WS) and
Ht(Θ) = G({˜u′
t,j}n
j=1; WS)
Optimize ξ ∈ argminξ 1
2 ||Gt( ˙u) − Ht(Θ)ξ||2
2 + K(ξ), where K(ξ) = ||ξ||1 is a regularizer chosen to promote
sparsity in ξ. It can be solved by sparsity-promoting SINDy method
insufficient sparsity retains spurious terms. This characteristic tradeoff is illustrated in in Figure 7, where
sparser DA–SHRED reconstructions more accurately recover the true governing operators despite yielding
slightly worse numerical fits to the data in regards to RSME.
The ability to determine how many terms are missing from the simulation model N(u′, x, t) depends
critically on available physical prior knowledge. In systems derived from well-studied PDEs, symmetry
arguments, conservation laws, or known operator hierarchies, the missing physics can be constrained within
a small set of candidate terms, such as higher-order diffusion, nonlinear advection, or corrections in the
form of divergence. In these situations, classical closure models and scale-separation theory [55, 56] often
provide clear expectations about the number and type of missing contributions, making sparse discovery
more reliable.
Conversely, in systems where external forcing, boundary interactions, unmeasured actuation, or nonlocal
effects play a dominant role, little or no prior knowledge exists regarding the dimensionality of the missing
operator space. In such cases, the accuracy–sparsity trade-off becomes even more influential, and overfitting
or underfitting risks are elevated due to the lack of constraints on the candidate library.
4.1 In the compressed space
The first algorithm we propose is a SINDy-based regression procedure applied directly to the difference
dynamics expressed in the compressed (latent) space. In a well-behaved DA–SHRED assimilation, we ob-
tain accurate latent-space representations of both the simulation operator N(u′, x, t) and the real dynamics
M(u′, x, t) = N(u′, x, t) + L′. Consequently, the discrepancy between these two representations - in the
form of a latent-space difference matrix -encodes the action of the missing physics projected onto the com-
pressed manifold. Recovering the physical operators responsible for this discrepancy reduces the algorithm
to identifying the functional terms whose latent-space signatures reconstruct this difference. This motivates
the use of sparsity-promoting regression to extract only the dominant contributors.
To accomplish this, we first evaluate the compressed reassembly of every candidate functional in the
original library by pushing each operator through the encoder and computing its corresponding action in
latent space. This yields a transformed library whose columns represent how much each candidate operator
influences the compressed coordinates. With this latent-space library in hand, we then apply a sparsity-
promoting SINDy regression to determine the minimal combination of candidate operators whose compressed
signatures reconstruct the observed difference dynamics. The resulting sparse coefficient vector identifies the
specific physical functionals that together constitute L′, thereby completing the discrepancy modeling.
13
Algorithm 2 Compressed advancing SINDy
Input:
A simulation model ˙u = N(u, x, t)
A multivariate time-series of simulation state space {ui}m
i=1 and corresponding sensor measurements of the
system {si}m
i=1
A multivariate time-series of real state space {u′
i}m
i=1 and corresponding sensor measurements of the system
{s′
i}m
i=1
A DA-SHRED architecture G({s′
i}t
i=t−k; WR) = T (G({si}t
i=t−k; WS); WT ) and a shallow decoder F for
restoration from the compressed latent space
A library of functional candidates Θ = {θj}n
j=1
Algorithm:
At time step t, perform the following -
Generate ˜u′
t = F(G({s′
i}t
i=t−k; WR)) of the current restored real state space
Compute ˜u′
t,j = ˜u′
t,j + Pm
i=1 θj(˜u′
t,j, si, t)dt of possible local perturbations at sensor locations
Acquire proxies in the latent space using the trained SHRED model
Gt( ˙u) = (G({s′
i}t+1
i=t+1−k; WR) + G({s′
i}t
i=t−k; WR) and Ht(Θ) = G({˜u′
t,j}n
j=1; WS) − G(˜u′
t; WS)
Optimize ξ ∈ argminξ 1
2 ||Gt( ˙u) − Ht(Θ)ξ||2
2 + K(ξ), where K(ξ) = ||ξ||1 is a regularizer chosen to promote
sparsity in ξ. It can be solved by sparsity-promoting SINDy method
4.2 Advancing in the compressed space
For certain state spaces, the limitations of the above algorithm become apparent. First, computing the com-
pressed response of every perturbation functional defined on the original state space can be computationally
demanding, especially when the functional library is large or when high-dimensional fields must be encoded
repeatedly. Second, because the algorithm relies on derivatives obtained via finite-difference or interpolation
schemes, the resulting numerical artifacts may be amplified during compression. This noise propagation can
corrupt the latent-space representations and ultimately prevent the sparse regression from converging to a
stable solution. These issues highlight the need for alternative formulations that avoid noise accumulation
and reduce the computational burden associated with evaluating the full scale operator library.
To address the limitations above, we propose a second SINDy-based algorithm that avoids operating
on the difference matrix formed from compressed reassemblies. Instead, this method constructs the target
regression signal directly from timestep-to-timestep differences in the latent space. By focusing on the
temporal increments of the trajectory, the algorithm bypasses the need to repeatedly evaluate and compress
the full operator library, thereby reducing both computational cost and sensitivity to derivative estimates
and noise.
Moreover, rather than applying each candidate functional to the entire original state space, we restrict
the perturbation evaluations to local neighborhoods surrounding the sensor locations. Although these local-
ized perturbations are not sufficient to reproduce the exact latent-space temporal differences, they provide
informative proxies whose aggregated behavior reflects the underlying physical corrections present in the
true dynamics. In practice, these localized operator responses capture the dominant directional influences
that DA–SHRED extracts with its time-delay embedding, and thus serve as meaningful surrogate signatures
for sparse regression. By leveraging these localized proxies instead of full-field operator projections, the
method substantially reduces computational complexity while still enabling the recovery of the functionals
comprising L′ in the missing physics.
The results of the recovery algorithms are already presented in Figs. 3–6. Specifically, each of these figures
shows the true L′ versus the discovered terms of L′ from DA-SHRED. Figure 7 also shows the trade-offs of
the DA-SHRED algorithm between RMSE and sparsity. Focusing on RMSE can lead to additional terms
being found in the sparse regression framework. Alternatively, the focus on sparsity tends to recover the
correct missing physics terms while producing a higher RMSE.
14
5 Conclusion and Discussions
In this work, we introduced the Data Assimilation with Shallow Recurrent Decoder (DA-SHRED) framework,
a hybrid machine learning and physics-informed architecture designed to bridge the simulation-to-reality
(SIM2REAL) gap in dynamic systems. By leveraging a reduced-order latent space learned from simulation
data and deploying it with sparse sensor measurements on the real physical system, DA-SHRED achieves
accurate state reconstruction and identifies missing physics in complex, nonlinear systems. The framework
extends the foundational SHRED model by incorporating data assimilation principles and embedding a sparse
identification of nonlinear dynamics (SINDy) regression within the latent space to extract parsimonious model
representation of the discrepancy between modeled and observed dynamics.
Through a series of challenging test cases - including the 2D damped Kuramoto–Sivashinsky equation,
2D Kolmogorov flow, Gray-Scott reaction–diffusion system, and rotating detonation engine (RDEs) - we
demonstrated that DA-SHRED model can robustly reconstruct unobserved system states and capture per-
turbative and damping effects that are absent from the original simulation models. The framework exhibits
rapid convergence once sufficient temporal information is gathered, even under sparse sensing constraints.
Notably, in the RDE example, the DA-SHRED model captured broadening behavior of the detonation front
induced by injector dynamics, emphasizing the framework’s ability to reconcile simplified computational
models with real-world complexity.
Theoretically, we established that DA-SHRED preserves the representational structure of the underlying
system under suitable assumptions. For linear systems, the closure of the SIM2REAL gap can be shown
analytically, while for nonlinear systems, convergence needs to be validated computationally. Moreover, in
the supplemental material, we provide further connection to port-Hamiltonian systems which gives a rigorous
example for understanding eigenspace preservation under perturbations, supporting the assumption that the
latent basis trained on simulation data remains valid when applied to perturbed real physics.
Several limitations and potential avenues for future work naturally emerge from this work. The current
DA–SHRED formulation relies on the assumption that the simulation and real systems share a sufficiently
similar latent basis. When significant modal shifts occur - due to nonstationary dynamics, regime changes,
or structural mismatches - the assimilation accuracy may degrade, which in turn complicates the reliable
discovery of missing functionals. To address this, incorporating adaptive basis updates or transfer-learning
mechanisms can potentially allow the latent representation to adjust dynamically to new regimes, while
preserving consistency with previously learned structures.
An adaptive SHRED framework can extend beyond merely assimilating data into a fixed latent space,
enabling the model to navigate changing conditions autonomously. For instance, in settings involving non-
stationary dynamics, changing boundaries, or heterogeneous data quality, new latent embeddings could be
constrained to remain close to historical structures unless the data provides strong evidence of a regime shift.
Mechanistically, this could be achieved using multi-timescale updates, such as a fast–slow clock architecture
with coupled LSTMs or other recurrent networks, allowing rapid adjustments to transient deviations while
maintaining stability over longer-term trends. Such an approach could enhance robustness to evolving dy-
namics, improve the fidelity of missing physics discovery, and expand the applicability of DA–SHRED to
more complex, real-world systems.
Additionally, multi-scale systems which exhibit dynamics on widely separated temporal or spatial scales
are particularly challenging to model in the current framework. Fast, high-frequency fluctuations may be un-
derrepresented in latent embeddings that primarily capture dominant, slow modes. As a result, interactions
between slow and fast processes - and the missing physics associated with them - can be difficult to accu-
rately identify and assimilate. Addressing these challenges requires methods capable of resolving multiple
scales simultaneously, such as scale-aware functional libraries or multi-timescale latent updates. Extensions
of SINDy designed for multiscale and noisy data settings [57, 58] provide a valuable starting point, but
their principles need to be leveraged within the SHRED architecture to address similar problems. Stochastic
systems also pose significant challenges because the underlying deterministic dynamics can be obscured. In
the current framework, latent embeddings and discrepancy modeling may inadvertently capture noise as
spurious dynamics and fail to resolve subtle stochastic effects. Prior work on SINDy-type regressions [59]
provides guidance by demonstrating approaches for identifying both drift and diffusion terms in stochastic
differential equations, but assimilation efforts on stochastic systems remain fundamentally challenging and
may require libraries of candidate functions that explicitly include stochastic terms.
15
Finally, as recent developments in physics-informed and PDE-aware deep learning architectures have sim-
ilarly aimed to merge data-driven inference with governing physical constraints [60, 61], data assimilation for
PDEs with nonlocal constraints still presents significant challenges. Unlike local PDE systems, where updates
depend primarily on nearby states, nonlocal terms - such as integral or fractional operators - introduce global
dependencies that complicate the SHRED architecture. This global coupling makes traditional assimilation
techniques less effective, as small perturbations can propagate and subject to constrains nonlocally, leading
to instability or slow convergence. Addressing these issues may require specialized reformulations, such as
hierarchical or multi-resolution representations to separate local and global effects, or latent space embed-
dings that explicitly capture nonlocal interactions. Such strategies might enable DA-SHRED framework to
handle a broader class of PDEs with complex, nonlocal dynamics.
Overall, DA-SHRED demonstrates a powerful synergy between data assimilation, reduced-order mod-
eling, and physics-informed model discovery. By unifying temporal encoding, sparse sensing, and inter-
pretable discrepancy modeling within a single architecture, it offers a promising pathway toward real-time,
data-efficient closure of the SIM2REAL gap in scientific and engineering applications.
Code and Data
All code and data can be found at: https://github.com/Capella22/DA-SHRED
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) AI Institute for Dynamical
Systems (dynamicsai.org), grant 2112085. JNK further acknowledges support from the Air Force Office of
Scientific Research (FA9550-24-1-0141) and from the AFOSR/AFRL Center of Excellence in Assimilation
of Flow Features in Compressible Reacting Flows under award number FA9550-25-1-0011, monitored by Dr.
Chiping Li and Dr. Ramakanth Munipalli.
References
[1] Steven L Brunton and J Nathan Kutz. Data-driven science and engineering: Machine learning, dy-
namical systems, and control . Cambridge University Press, 2022.
[2] Stefano Riva et al. “Robust state estimation from partial out-core measurements with shallow recurrent
decoder for nuclear reactors”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12550 (2024).
[3] Sebastian H¨ ofer et al. “Sim2real in robotics and automation: Applications and challenges”. In: IEEE
transactions on automation science and engineering 18.2 (2021), pp. 398–400.
[4] Abhishek Kadian et al. “Sim2real predictivity: Does evaluation in simulation predict real-world per-
formance?” In: IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5.4 (2020), pp. 6670–6677.
[5] Jan P Williams, Olivia Zahn, and J Nathan Kutz. “Sensing with shallow recurrent decoder networks”.
In: Proceedings of the Royal Society A 480.2298 (2024), p. 20240054.
[6] Matteo Tomasetto et al. “Reduced order modeling with shallow recurrent decoder networks”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.10930 (2025).
[7] Mars Liyao Gao, Jan P Williams, and J Nathan Kutz. “Sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics and
Koopman operators with Shallow Recurrent Decoder Networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13329
(2025).
[8] Kody Law, Andrew Stuart, and Kostas Zygalakis. “Data assimilation”. In: Cham, Switzerland: Springer
214 (2015), p. 52.
[9] Geir Evensen. Data assimilation: the ensemble Kalman filter . Springer, 2009.
[10] Sebastian Reich and Colin Cotter. Probabilistic forecasting and Bayesian data assimilation. Cambridge
University Press, 2015.
16
[11] Geir Evensen. “The ensemble Kalman filter: Theoretical formulation and practical implementation”.
In: Ocean dynamics 53.4 (2003), pp. 343–367.
[12] Peter L Houtekamer and Herschel L Mitchell. “Ensemble kalman filtering”. In: Quarterly Journal of the
Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and physical
oceanography 131.613 (2005), pp. 3269–3289.
[13] Andrew C Lorenc. “Modelling of error covariances by 4D-Var data assimilation”. In: Quarterly Journal
of the Royal Meteorological Society: A journal of the atmospheric sciences, applied meteorology and
physical oceanography 129.595 (2003), pp. 3167–3182.
[14] Michael Fisher and Erik Andersson. “Developments in 4D-Var and Kalman filtering”. In: (2001).
[15] Kadierdan Kaheman et al. “Learning discrepancy models from experimental data”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.08574 (2019).
[16] Megan R Ebers, Katherine M Steele, and J Nathan Kutz. “Discrepancy modeling framework: Learning
missing physics, modeling systematic residuals, and disambiguating between deterministic and random
effects”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 23.1 (2024), pp. 440–469.
[17] Matthew Levine and Andrew Stuart. “A framework for machine learning of model error in dynamical
systems”. In: Communications of the American Mathematical Society 2.07 (2022), pp. 283–344.
[18] Steven L Brunton, Joshua L Proctor, and J Nathan Kutz. “Discovering governing equations from data
by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems”. In: Proceedings of the national academy of
sciences 113.15 (2016), pp. 3932–3937.
[19] Samuel H Rudy et al. “Data-driven discovery of partial differential equations”. In: Science advances
3.4 (2017), e1602614.
[20] Arjan Van Der Schaft. “Port-Hamiltonian systems: an introductory survey”. In: Proceedings of the
international congress of mathematicians . Vol. 3. suppl 2. Marta Sanz-Sole, Javier Soria, Juan Luis
Verona, Joan Verdura, Madrid, Spain. 2006, pp. 1339–1365.
[21] Alexander Warsewa et al. “A port-Hamiltonian approach to modeling the structural dynamics of
complex systems”. In: Applied Mathematical Modelling 89 (2021), pp. 1528–1546.
[22] Hannes Gernandt et al. “Port-Hamiltonian formulation of nonlinear electrical circuits”. In: Journal of
Geometry and Physics 159 (2021), p. 103959.
[23] Ramy Rashad et al. “Port-Hamiltonian modeling of ideal fluid flow: Part I. Foundations and kinetic
energy”. In: Journal of Geometry and Physics 164 (2021), p. 104201.
[24] Arjan van der Schaft. “Interconnections of input-output Hamiltonian systems with dissipation”. In:
2016 IEEE 55th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE. 2016, pp. 4686–4691.
[25] C Jayaprakash, F Hayot, and Rahul Pandit. “Universal properties of the two-dimensional Kuramoto-
Sivashinsky equation”. In: Physical review letters 71.1 (1993), p. 12.
[26] Anna Kalogirou, Eric E Keaveny, and Demetrios T Papageorgiou. “An in-depth numerical study of
the two-dimensional Kuramoto–Sivashinsky equation”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Math-
ematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 471.2179 (2015), p. 20140932.
[27] Mehdi Dehghan and Vahid Mohammadi. “Two-dimensional simulation of the damped Kuramoto–
Sivashinsky equation via radial basis function-generated finite difference scheme combined with an ex-
ponential time discretization”. In: Engineering Analysis with Boundary Elements 107 (2019), pp. 168–
184.
[28] V. I. Arnold and L. D. Meshalkin. Seminar on Hydrodynamic Stability. Moscow State University, 1960.
[29] LD Meshalkin and Ia G Sinai. “Investigation of the stability of a stationary solution of a system
of equations for the plane movement of an incompressible viscous liquid”. In: Journal of Applied
Mathematics and Mechanics 25.6 (1961), pp. 1700–1705.
[30] Nathan Platt, Lawrence Sirovich, and Nessan Fitzmaurice. “An investigation of chaotic Kolmogorov
flows”. In: Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics 3.4 (1991), pp. 681–696.
17
[31] Uriel Frisch and Andre˘ ı Nikolaevich Kolmogorov.Turbulence: the legacy of AN Kolmogorov. Cambridge
university press, 1995.
[32] Gary J Chandler and Rich R Kerswell. “Invariant recurrent solutions embedded in a turbulent two-
dimensional Kolmogorov flow”. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 722 (2013), pp. 554–595.
[33] Dan Lucas and Rich Kerswell. “Spatiotemporal dynamics in two-dimensional Kolmogorov flow over
large domains”. In: Journal of fluid mechanics 750 (2014), pp. 518–554.
[34] Mohammad Farazmand and Themistoklis P Sapsis. “Reduced-order prediction of rogue waves in two-
dimensional deep-water waves”. In: Journal of Computational Physics 340 (2017), pp. 418–434.
[35] Vadim Borue and Steven A Orszag. “Numerical study of three-dimensional Kolmogorov flow at high
Reynolds numbers”. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 306 (1996), pp. 293–323.
[36] Peter Gray and Stephen K Scott. “Autocatalytic reactions in the isothermal, continuous stirred tank
reactor: Oscillations and instabilities in the system A+ 2B → 3B; B→ C”. In: Chemical Engineering
Science 39.6 (1984), pp. 1087–1097.
[37] John E Pearson. “Complex patterns in a simple system”. In: Science 261.5118 (1993), pp. 189–192.
[38] Kyoung J Lee et al. “Pattern formation by interacting chemical fronts”. In: Science 261.5118 (1993),
pp. 192–194.
[39] Ehud Meron. “Pattern formation in excitable media”. In: Physics reports 218.1 (1992), pp. 1–66.
[40] Marc R Roussel and Jichang Wang. “Pattern formation in excitable media with concentration-dependent
diffusivities”. In: The Journal of chemical physics 120.17 (2004), pp. 8079–8088.
[41] YN Kyrychko et al. “Control of spatiotemporal patterns in the Gray–Scott model”. In: Chaos: An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 19.4 (2009).
[42] Ishtiaq Ali and Maliha Tehseen Saleem. “Spatiotemporal dynamics of reaction–diffusion system and its
application to turing pattern formation in a gray–scott model”. In: Mathematics 11.6 (2023), p. 1459.
[43] Fabio Giampaolo et al. “Physics-informed neural networks approach for 1D and 2D Gray-Scott sys-
tems”. In: Advanced Modeling and Simulation in Engineering Sciences 9.1 (2022), p. 5.
[44] Piotr Wola´ nski. “Detonative propulsion”. In: Proceedings of the combustion Institute 34.1 (2013),
pp. 125–158.
[45] Frank K Lu and Eric M Braun. “Rotating detonation wave propulsion: experimental challenges, mod-
eling, and engine concepts”. In: Journal of Propulsion and Power 30.5 (2014), pp. 1125–1142.
[46] Jorge Sousa, Guillermo Paniagua, and Elena Collado Morata. “Thermodynamic analysis of a gas
turbine engine with a rotating detonation combustor”. In: Applied energy 195 (2017), pp. 247–256.
[47] James Koch. “Nonlinear dynamics of rotating detonation waves”. PhD thesis. 2020.
[48] James Koch et al. “Mode-locked rotating detonation waves: Experiments and a model equation”. In:
Physical Review E 101.1 (2020), p. 013106.
[49] James Koch and J Nathan Kutz. “Modeling thermodynamic trends of rotating detonation engines”.
In: Physics of Fluids 32.12 (2020).
[50] James Koch et al. “Multiscale physics of rotating detonation waves: Autosolitons and modulational
instabilities”. In: Physical Review E 104.2 (2021), p. 024210.
[51] Manabu Hishida, Toshi Fujiwara, and Piotr Wolanski. “Fundamentals of rotating detonations”. In:
Shock waves 19.1 (2009), pp. 1–10.
[52] Douglas Schwer and Kailas Kailasanath. “Numerical investigation of the physics of rotating-detonation-
engines”. In: Proceedings of the combustion institute 33.2 (2011), pp. 2195–2202.
[53] J Nathan Kutz et al. “Universal dynamics of damped-driven systems: the logistic map as a normal
form for energy balance”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11748 (2022).
[54] Rei Kawashima et al. “A quasi-one-dimensional analytic model of rotating detonation combustors”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.02915 (2017).
18
[55] Stephen B Pope. “Turbulent flows”. In: Measurement Science and Technology 12.11 (2001), pp. 2020–
2021.
[56] Pierre Sagaut. Large eddy simulation for incompressible flows: an introduction . Springer, 2006.
[57] Kathleen P Champion, Steven L Brunton, and J Nathan Kutz. “Discovery of nonlinear multiscale
systems: Sampling strategies and embeddings”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 18.1
(2019), pp. 312–333.
[58] Urban Fasel et al. “Ensemble-SINDy: Robust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit,
with active learning and control”. In: Proceedings of the Royal Society A 478.2260 (2022), p. 20210904.
[59] Lorenzo Boninsegna, Feliks N¨ uske, and Cecilia Clementi. “Sparse learning of stochastic dynamical
equations”. In: The Journal of chemical physics 148.24 (2018).
[60] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. “Physics-informed neural networks: A deep
learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential
equations”. In: Journal of Computational physics 378 (2019), pp. 686–707.
[61] Nicholas Geneva and Nicholas Zabaras. “Modeling the dynamics of PDE systems with physics-constrained
deep auto-regressive networks”. In: Journal of Computational Physics 403 (2020), p. 109056.
19
Supplemental Material
A Preservation of the eigenspace
In the formulation of our model, we made a bold assumption that provided we have enough sensors, the
real physics in the latent space could be well-represented by the same eigenspace we have for the simulation
model. Such behavior cannot be easily shown, as introduced in Section 2.1, and may not even hold for
general dynamical systems. However, for a certain type of dynamical system and damping models that are
port-Hamiltonian, eigenspaces can be deliberately designed to be preserved, which allow us to use the same
basis for simulation and perturbed reality[20].
A.1 A simple case - damped pendulum
In this example we use a damped pendulum as our real physics to be studied, which is given by:
˙ω = −g
l sin(θ) − d
ml2 ω + u
ml2
˙θ = ω
where θ is the pendulum angle, ω is the angular momentum, d is the damping coefficient, and u is external
input.
Therefore, the Hamiltonian function, representing the total energy, is given by
H(θ, ω) = 1
2ml2ω2 + mgl(1 − cos θ).
And in the port-Hamiltonian architecture, the system can be reformulated as:
 ˙θ
˙ω

=
 0 1
−1 0

−
0 0
0 d
ml2
 ∂H
∂θ∂H
∂ω

+
0
1

u.
where
• J =
 0 1
−1 0

is skew-symmetric.
• R =
0 0
0 d
ml2

imports dissipation through damping.
Therefore, with the simulation model corresponds to a simple pendulum while the underlying physics
reflect a damped pendulum, the eigenspace structure of the state space remains preserved. Consequently,
one can expect the deployment on this eigenspace to satisfy the same favorable criteria, yielding accurate
matches even with a limited number of sensors, as illustrated in Figure 8. The DA-SHRED model effectively
bridges the discrepancy, despite the presence of a moderate 5% noise level in the input data.
20
Figure 8: The DA-SHRED restoration of damped pendulum dynamics. The angular displacement and angular
velocity are presented for three cases: the simulated simple-pendulum model, the unknown true dynamics (damped
pendulum), and the DA-SHRED reconstruction.
A.2 Detailed setup and notation
Let X ⊆Rn be open and simply connected. A finite-dimensional port-Hamiltonian system (PHS) on X with
inputs u ∈ Rm is written in coordinates as
˙x =
 
J(x) − R(x)

∇H(x) + G(x) u, y = G(x)⊤∇H(x), (17)
where:
• H ∈ C2(X) is the Hamiltonian (energy) function,
• J(x) ∈ Rn×n is skew-symmetric: J(x)⊤ = −J(x) (structure/interconnection),
• R(x) ∈ Rn×n is symmetric positive semidefinite: R(x)⊤ = R(x) ⪰ 0 (dissipation),
• G(x) ∈ Rn×m is the input (port) map.
We write dH(x) or ∇H(x) interchangeably for the exterior derivative / gradient.
In the next few sections, we show that under natural perturbations the perturbed dynamics can again be
written in the form (17) (possibly with modifiedeH, eJ, eR, eG), i.e. the PHS “base” (the algebraic/skew/symmetric
structure and the Dirac-type interconnection) persists.
A.3 Differential-forms perspective and the integrability condition
We regard ∇H as the exact 1-form dH. Suppose a perturbation of the gradient-term appears as an additive
1-form δ(x) ∈ Ω1(X) so that the perturbed dynamics read
˙x = (J − R)
 
∇H + δ

+ G u. (18)
21
Proposition 1 (Exactness / Poincar´ e lemma). If X is simply connected and δ is a C1 1-form on X with
exterior derivative dδ = 0 (i.e. δ is closed), then there exists a scalar function ε ∈ C2(X) such that δ = dε.
Consequently, defining eH := H + ε yields
∇ eH = ∇H + δ,
and the perturbed system (18) is of port-Hamiltonian form with the same J, R, Gand Hamiltonian eH.
Proof. This is a direct application of the Poincar´ e lemma: on a simply connected domain every closed 1-
form is exact. If dδ = 0 then there exists ε with dε = δ. Set eH = H + ε. Substitute into (18) to obtain
˙x = (J − R)∇ eH + Gu, which has the PHS form with unchanged J, R, G.
Remark 1. The condition dδ = 0 is necessary for a global scalar potential ε to exist. If δ fails to be closed
globally, one can still find a local potential on any contractible subdomain; thus the PHS form persists locally
but not necessarily globally.
A.4 Algebraic persistence under matrix perturbations
Now consider perturbations to the structure/dissipation/port matrices. Replace ( J, R, G) by (J + ∆J, R+
∆R, G+ ∆G). The perturbed dynamics become
˙x =
 
(J + ∆J) − (R + ∆R)

∇H + (G + ∆G)u + (J − R)δ, (19)
where the extra term (J−R)δ arises if we also perturb the gradient as above; we will handle that by absorbing
δ into a modified Hamiltonian when possible.
The algebraic constraints that define the PHS class are:
J⊤ = −J, R ⊤ = R ⪰ 0.
These constraints are preserved under small perturbations provided the perturbations respect skew/symmetry
and positive semidefiniteness.
Proposition 2 (Persistence under admissible matrix perturbations) . Let K ⊂ Xbe compact. Suppose
∆J(x) is skew-symmetric for all x ∈ K, ∆R(x) is symmetric for all x ∈ K and small in operator norm so
that R(x) + ∆R(x) ⪰ 0 for all x ∈ K, and ∆G(x) is small. Then the perturbed matrices
eJ := J + ∆J, eR := R + ∆R, eG := G + ∆G
satisfy eJ⊤ = − eJ and eR⊤ = eR ⪰ 0 on K, hence the algebraic PHS constraints remain valid on K.
Proof. Immediate from linearity of transpose and continuity of eigenvalues (Weyl inequalities). A sum
of skew-symmetric matrices is skew-symmetric. For symmetric R and symmetric ∆ R, eigenvalues vary
continuously with the perturbation; choosing ∥∆R∥ less than the smallest strictly positive gap of R on K
(or ensuring no negative eigenvalue crosses zero) guarantees eR ⪰ 0.
Theorem 2 (Persistence of PHS form under natural perturbations). Let (17) be a PHS on a simply connected
domain X. Consider perturbations ∆J, ∆R, ∆G (matrix fields) and a 1-form perturbation δ so that the
perturbed dynamics are
˙x =
 
(J + ∆J) − (R + ∆R)
 
∇H + δ

+ (G + ∆G)u.
Assume:
1. ∆J is skew-symmetric on X,
2. ∆R is symmetric and small enough on compact subsets to keep R + ∆R ⪰ 0,
3. δ is closed: dδ = 0 on X.
22
Then there exists eH = H + ε with dε = δ and
eJ := J + ∆J, eR := R + ∆R, eG := G + ∆G
such that the perturbed system can be written globally in PHS form
˙x = ( eJ − eR)∇ eH + eG u.
Proof. By the Poincar´ e lemma (closed ⇒ exact on simply connected X) there exists ε with dε = δ. Set
eH = H + ε. Substitute into the perturbed dynamics and collect matrix perturbations into eJ, eR, eG. By
Proposition 2 the algebraic PHS constraints hold for the perturbed matrices on compact subsets where ∆ R
is small, hence the system is again PHS with ( eJ, eR, eH, eG).
Remark 2. If δ is not closed globally, one may still obtain a local potential and hence a local PHS repre-
sentation on contractible subsets. If δ is not expressible as an exact 1-form but can be decomposed as
δ = δgrad + δng,
where δgrad is exact and δng is of the form (∆J −∆R)∇ bH for some ∆J = −∆J⊤, ∆R = ∆R⊤ ⪰ 0 and some
bH, then one can absorb δgrad into a modified Hamiltonian and interpret δng as further matrix perturbations.
Such decompositions are problem-dependent and often possible for physically motivated perturbations.
A.5 More examples
A.5.1 Example 1: Mass–spring–damper (one degree of freedom)
State x =
q
p

with q position and p momentum. Hamiltonian
H(q, p) = p2
2m + kq2
2 ,
with m >0 mass and k >0 stiffness. Choose
J =
 0 1
−1 0

, R =
0 0
0 c

, G =
0
1

,
where c ≥ 0 is viscous damping and u is an external force. The PHS dynamics are
˙x = (J − R)∇H + Gu =
 0 1
−1 −c
"
kqp
m
#
+
0
1

u.
Now perturb the mass m 7→ m + ∆m with small ∆m. The new Hamiltonian is
eH(q, p) = p2
2(m + ∆m) + kq2
2 .
Hence the perturbation to the dynamics modifies only ∇H (an exact perturbation), and by Proposition 1 we
may absorb this into eH while leaving J, R, Gunchanged. Thus the system remains PHS in the same base.
If instead we perturb the damping c 7→ c + ∆c, this changes R to R + ∆R with
∆R =
0 0
0 ∆ c

,
which is symmetric and (for ∆ c ≥ −c) preserves positive semidefiniteness; hence PHS algebraic constraints
persist (Proposition 2).
23
A.5.2 Example 2: Series RLC circuit
Consider a series RLC circuit with state variables
x =

ϕ
q

,
where ϕ is the flux linkage in the inductor and q is the capacitor charge. Energies:
H(ϕ, q) = ϕ2
2L + q2
2C ,
with inductance L >0 and capacitance C >0. Take
J =
0 −1
1 0

, R =
r 0
0 0

, G =
1
0

,
where r ≥ 0 is the resistance and the input u is a voltage source. The PHS equations are
˙x = (J − R)∇H + Gu =
0 −1
1 −r


ϕ
Lq
C

 +
1
0

u.
Perturbing L or C (e.g. L 7→ L + ∆L) modifies H to
eH(ϕ, q) = ϕ2
2(L + ∆L) + q2
2C ,
which is an exact change to ∇H and hence absorbed into eH. Perturbing r modifies R directly in a symmetric
way; small changes preserve R ⪰ 0. Thus practical component tolerances correspond to the admissible
perturbation classes and the circuit remains representable in the same PHS base.
A.5.3 Damped, forced wave equation
Consider the damped wave equation
∂2u
∂t2 − c2∇2u + d ∂u
∂t = f(x, t), x ∈ Ω ⊂ Rn.
Introduce the state
x =
u
p

, p = ∂u
∂t ,
where u is displacement and p is momentum density. The Hamiltonian functional (total stored energy) is
H(u, p) =
Z
Ω
p2
2 + c2
2 ∥∇u∥2

dx.
Define the variational gradients
∇H =
"
− c2∇2u
p
#
.
Choose the port-Hamiltonian structure matrices
J =
"
0 1
−1 0
#
, R =
"
0 0
0 d
#
, G =
"
0
1
#
,
where d ≥ 0 is the damping coefficient and uin = f(x, t) is an external force density.
24
t = 0.0
 t = 5.0
 t = 10.0
 t = 15.0
Figure 9: The behavior of 2D Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation without damping.
The port-Hamiltonian dynamics are
˙x = (J − R)∇H + G uin =
"
0 1
−1 −d
#"
− c2∇2u
p
#
+
"
0
1
#
f(x, t).
Expanding the components gives
˙u = p, ˙p = c2∇2u − d p+ f(x, t),
which recovers the original PDE.
A perturbation in the wave speed c 7→ c + ∆c modifies only the Hamiltonian (an exact perturbation),
leaving J, R, Gunchanged; hence the system remains in the same port-Hamiltonian base. In contrast,
perturbing the damping d 7→ d + ∆d alters the dissipation matrix to
R + ∆R =
"
0 0
0 d + ∆d
#
,
which preserves symmetry and, for ∆ d ≥ −d, maintains positive semidefiniteness; therefore the port-
Hamiltonian algebraic constraints are still satisfied.
B Experimental Details
Here we provide further experimental details and supplemental figures for the experiments in Section 3 of
the main text.
B.1 2D damped Kuramoto–Sivashinsky equation system
In this setting, our data simulation model is the 2D version of damped Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation (KS
equation), which is given by
ut + 1
2|∇u|2 + ∇2u + ν∇4u = 0
while the real physics is a damped version of the KS equation (DKS) [27], given by
u′
t + 1
2|∇u′|2 + ∇2u′ + ν∇4u′ + (v · ∇)u′ − γu′ = 0 (20)
with damping force ( v · ∇)u′ − γu′.
Still, for simplicity we set the fourth order parameter to be ν = 1. Figure 9 exhibits its behavior on a
2D map of range [0 , 64] × [0, 64].
25
B.2 2D Kolmogorov flow
Figure 10 shows the results of the 2D damped Kolmogorov flow in earlier time steps. In contrast to the fast
convergence from simpler examples, the DA-SHRED model did struggle a bit with perturbations on the 2D
Kolmogorov flow.
At the initial stages of the data assimilation process, the DA-SHRED model exhibited poor performance,
as shown in Figure 9, likely due to an incomplete alignment between the model’s internal dynamics and the
observed data. During this early period ( t <20), the system’s state estimates were still heavily influenced by
prior uncertainties and insufficiently informed, leading to large discrepancies between DA-SHRED restora-
tions and ground truth. However, afterwards, the model began to stabilize and progressively converge toward
the real physics, suggesting that the assimilation updates had accumulated enough information to reduce
model bias and variance, allowing the DA-SHRED framework to achieve a consistent alignment between its
restored and unobserved real state spaces.
simulation real physics DA-SHRED
t=20.0
t=15.0
L = {(ω)} L′ = {(ω, ω∇2ω, ω3)}
Figure 10: The result of 2D damped Kolmogorov flow. Figures on the same row are taken at the same timestep.
The left column represents the undamped simulation model (2D Kolmogorov flow without damping); the middle
column represents unknown real physics (2D Kolmogorov flow with linear damping); and the right column represents
state space restored by DA-SHRED.
B.3 1D rotating detonation engines
Figure 11 shows the results of the 1D rotating detonation engines in later time steps after the meet of
detonation fronts.
In the one-dimensional rotating detonation engine (RDE) framework, simplified numerical models typ-
ically represent the detonation front as a sharp and well-defined discontinuity. However, in practical RDE
configurations, the injector dynamics — including spatial non-uniformities in fuel injection, local turbulence,
and incomplete mixing — introduce complex flow features that effectively broaden the detonation front. This
physical broadening arises from localized variations in pressure, temperature, and equivalence ratio near the
26
injection region, and leads to an extended reaction zone rather than an idealized, infinitesimally thin front.
In the DA-SHRED experiments, this behavior was clearly observed in both figure 6 and figure 10: the det-
onation front exhibited a wider structure compared to the corresponding simplified 1D simulations. This
observation gives further hint on the critical role of injector-induced flow inhomogeneities in determining the
effective detonation structure and underscores the necessity of incorporating realistic injector and mixing
physics in data assimilation frameworks for accurate RDE modeling.
simulation
real physics
L′ = {(u, u3)}
DA-SHRED
L′ = {(u, u3, λ2u)}
L′ = {(u)}
 L′ = {(u)}
Figure 11: The DA-SHRED reconstruction of 1D damped RDE model at a later timestep beyond that displayed in
Figure 6. Similarly, one simulation model is deployed on two different real physics settings, and the rightmost column
represents the corresponding two DA-SHRED results towards convergence.
27