On the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Last-layer
Retraining
John C. Hill1∗ Tyler LaBonte2 Xinchen Zhang1 Vidya Muthukumar2,1
1School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
2H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
Last-layer retraining (LLR) methods — wherein the last layer of a neural network is reinitialized and
retrained on a held-out set following ERM training — have garnered interest as an efficient approach to
rectify dependence on spurious correlations and improve performance on minority groups. Surprisingly,
LLR has been found to improve worst-group accuracy even when the held-out set is an imbalanced subset
of the training set. We initially hypothesize that this “unreasonable effectiveness” of LLR is explained by
its ability to mitigate neural collapse through the held-out set, resulting in the implicit bias of gradient
descent benefiting robustness. Our empirical investigationdoes notsupport this hypothesis. Instead, we
present strong evidence for an alternative hypothesis: that the success of LLR is primarily due to better
group balance in the held-out set. We conclude by showing how the recent algorithms CB-LLR and AFR
perform implicit group-balancing to elicit a robustness improvement.
1 Introduction
The standard neural network training procedure of empirical risk minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1998), which
minimizes the average classification loss, is well-known to overfit to spurious correlations in the training
set (Geirhos et al., 2020). The conjunction of target labels and spurious features formgroupswithin the
dataset; the smallest groups in each class, termedminority groups, are often most difficult to correctly
classify at test time (Oren et al., 2019). While ERM may exhibit high average accuracy on these datasets,
performance on minority groups can be no better than random guessing (Shah et al., 2020). Therefore, when
robust minority group performance is critical, worst-group accuracy (WGA) is often a more useful metric.
Due to the prevalence of spurious features and minority groups (race, gender, age,etc.) in high consequence
applications such as medicine (Zech et al., 2018) and criminal justice (Chouldechova, 2016), significant work
has focused on algorithms which maximize WGA — also called group robustness (Sagawa et al., 2020a).
A promising family of group robustness methods are based on last-layer retraining (LLR), wherein the last
layer is reinitialized and retrained on a held-out set following ERM training. The original LLR method, called
deep feature reweighting (DFR), requires the held-out set to comprise an equal amount of data from each
group (Izmailov et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al., 2023). This limits its practical application, as the groups are
often unknown ahead of time or difficult to annotate.1 While DFR still performs the best, group information
(even on the validation set) was recently found to be unnecessary to observesomenon-trivial gain in WGA
over ERM (S. Qiu et al., 2023; LaBonte et al., 2023). In particular, LaBonte et al., 2023 find that LLR on a
held-outi.i.d.subset of the training set — suffering from the same group imbalance as the training set — is
sufficient for improved WGA. This surprising observation led LaBonte et al., 2023 to term LLR a “free lunch”
for group robustness, but why this “free lunch" arose in the first place remained unclear.
Contributions.In this paper, we take a “scientific method” approach to investigate why LLR on an
imbalanced held-out subset of the training set can perform so well. We make the following main contributions:
∗ Corresponding author. Email:jhill326@gatech.edu.
1 However, DFR compares favorably in this respect to methods which require group annotations for the entire training set,
such as group distributionally robust optimization (DRO) (Sagawa et al., 2020a).
1
arXiv:2512.01766v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
• We propose an initial hypothesis, visualized in Figure 1, that neural collapse on the training set results
in a biased ERM classifier since the class means are dominated by majority group data. Since features
arenotcollapsed on the held-out set (Hui et al., 2022), this would lead to varying behavior on majority
and minority group data. Our hypothesis is that the implicit bias of gradient descent during LLR then
elicits amaximum-margin linear classifieron the features, which has been connected in some settings
to better robustness guarantees (Chaudhuri et al., 2023).
• We put forth evidence whichdoes notsupport our initial hypothesis. In particular, we show that
neural collapse either does not occur or occurs after the standard number of epochs on four benchmark
datasets. Moreover, we show that convergence of the LLR classifier to the maximum-margin solution
is extremely slow. Since computation of the neural collapse metricNC1 was previously infeasible for
large-scale models, we propose a memory-efficient algorithm to compute a stochastic estimate ofNC1
via the Hutchinson trace estimator (Hutchinson, 1989).
• We present strong evidence for an alternative hypothesis: that the success of LLR is primarily due
tobetter group balancein the held-out set, often achieved implicitly through class balancing. Our
experiments indicate that LLR does not improve over ERM when the held-out set has the same group
balance as the training set. On the other hand, LLR with a better group balance enjoys drastically
improved WGA, and vice versa. We show that the test WGA of LLR is highly correlated with the test
WGA of ERM when both are trained with the same amount of data and the same group balance, with
Pearson correlation coefficientr>0.9on Waterbirds and CivilComments.
• Ultimately, we reevaluate the “free lunch” interpretation of LLR by showing that class balanced LLR
(CB-LLR) (LaBonte et al., 2023) and automatic feature reweighting (AFR) (S. Qiu et al., 2023) owe
their improved WGA primarily toimplicit group-balancingon the held-out set. On a positive note, we
show that LLR can recover the WGA of an optimally class-balanced model even when ERM was not
optimally class-balanced. More broadly, LLR remains an effective method to achieve group robustness
using group annotations only on the held-out set (or even proxies thereof, such as in SELF (LaBonte
et al., 2023) and AFR (S. Qiu et al., 2023)). When group annotations are expensive, LLR on a more
group-balanced held-out set is therefore an attractive improvement over ERM.
1.1 Related work
Spurious correlations.Reliance on spurious correlations is a widely-studied phenomenon in machine
learning which is known to exacerbate bias and hinder generalization (see,e.g.,Beery et al., 2018; Geirhos
et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2021). Much work has been devoted to mitigating the adverse affects from spurious
correlations (Sagawa et al., 2020a). Methods which have been demonstrated to reduce the bias caused by
spurious correlations without the need for large quantities of group labels, such as Just Train Twice (E. Z. Liu
et al., 2021), Deep Feature Reweighting (Kirichenko et al., 2023), and class-balancing (Idrissi et al., 2022;
Chaudhuri et al., 2023; Shwartz-Ziv et al., 2023; LaBonte et al., 2024), are of particular interest. While our
understanding of how spurious features are learned and forgotten during training is incomplete (Izmailov et al.,
2022), recent studies are beginning to unravel the joint dynamics of core and spurious feature learning (G. Qiu
et al., 2024).
Last-layer retraining (LLR).Proposed as Deep Feature Reweighting by Izmailov et al., 2022; Kirichenko
et al., 2023, LLR has recently garnered interest as an efficient approach to improve group robustness in a
variety of settings (S. Qiu et al., 2023; LaBonte et al., 2023; Stromberg et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025; Qiao
et al., 2025). The success of LLR is predicated on ERM learning both core and spurious features during
training, but relying too heavily on spurious features within the last layer (Kirichenko et al., 2023; Ye et al.,
2023). Practically, LLR is appealing because of its ability to achieve much of the benefit of full fine-tuning at
a fraction of the computational cost while only requiring limited use of group annotations.
2
(a) Collapsed Training Fea-
tures with Biased Classifier (b) Uncollapsed Held-out Fea-
tures with Biased Classifier (c)
Uncollapsed Held-out Fea-
tures with Max-Margin Clas-
sifier
Figure 1:Visualization of our initial hypothesis.In Figure 1(a), we represent training set features
collapsing to their class means — dominated by majority group data — resulting in a biased ERM classifier.
In Figure 1(b), we show a biased ERM classifier that performs poorly on the uncollapsed minority group
features within the held-out set at the beginning of the second stage of training. In Figure 1(c), we present
the final aspect of our hypothesis. During LLR, the features are not collapsed on the held-out set, and so
the implicit bias of gradient descent elicits a maximum-margin classifier which is invariant to the spurious
feature. Importantly, our empirical investigationdoes notsupport this hypothesis. Instead, we find that the
success of LLR is primarily explained by better group balance in the held-out set.
Neural collapse.We study how LLR interacts with the phenomenon ofneural collapse, first identified
by Papyan et al., 2020; Han et al., 2022. Neural collapse describes the collapse offeature variabilityduring
training — in other words, the features of each datapoint within a given class collapse to the mean feature
vector inside that class. Recently, neural collapse has been studied in connection with fairness and spurious
correlations in the context of ERM by Lu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025.
Additionally, investigations of neural collapse in imbalanced data settings (though mostly focused on minority
classes) (Fang et al., 2021; Thrampoulidis et al., 2022; Dang et al., 2023; Hong and Ling, 2023) provide
motivation for studying the impact of minority group collapse. The role neural collapse plays in group robust
ERM performance is still unclear. Neural collapse has been observed to produce less biased (Xu et al., 2025),
but also less separable group representations (Lu et al., 2024). Importantly for our purposes, neural collapse
has been classified as anoptimization phenomenon, meaning it occurs only on the training set and not on
held-out data (Hui et al., 2022). Our initial hypothesis is that this difference in feature behavior between seen
and unseen data can help explain why ERM underperforms LLR (due to the fact that LLR has additional
access to the unseen held-out set as a result of its two-stage training protocol).
Implicit bias and margin.The second stage of LLR is simply logistic regression performed on the learned
ERM features (Kirichenko et al., 2023). Therefore, we expect implicit bias results for logistic regression to
apply to our setting. We draw on the literature studying the implicit bias of gradient descent in logistic
regression toward the maximumℓ2-margin classifier, studied in the separable case by Soudry et al., 2018 and in
the non-separable case by Ji and Telgarsky, 2019. Large minimum margin over the training data (which is the
default definition of margin) can imply good generalization upper bounds (Bartlett et al., 1998; Koltchinskii
and Panchenko, 2002). Recent results suggest that, under certain conditions, the maximum-margin classifier
coincides with the classifier achieving optimal worst-group accuracy (Chaudhuri et al., 2023), offering a
possible bridge between implicit-bias theory and robust-optimization perspectives on group fairness.
3
2 Preliminaries
Problem Setup.We study classification with input domain Xand label setYin the presence ofspurious
features S, where each examplex∈X is associated with exactly one spurious features(x) ∈S. The training,
validation, and test datasets are partitioned intogroupsG:= Y×S; letΩg ⊆{1,...,m} andΩ y ⊆{1,...,m}
denote the indices of training points in groupg∈G and class y∈Y , respectively. We call groups with
maximal |Ωg|in the training set themajoritygroups and the restminoritygroups; theworstgroup(s) are
those with the lowest test accuracy. (In general, the majority and minority groups will not vary between the
training and test sets.) Our objective is to learn models that perform uniformly well across groups despite
imbalance, quantified byworst-group accuracy(WGA) — the minimum accuracy over all groups inG(Sagawa
et al., 2020a).
Class-balancing.We adopt the definition of a class-balanced dataset as one where the expected number of
samples from every class in the label spaceYis identical. Adhering to the framework established by LaBonte
et al., 2024, we evaluate three distinct balancing strategies:subsetting,upsampling, andupweighting.
• Subsetting: This method enforces balance by strictly limiting the size of all classes to match that of the
minority class. We achieve this by uniformly subsampling the majority classes without replacement. It
is important to note that this subset is generated once prior to training and remains static throughout
the optimization process.
•Upsampling: This approach utilizes the full dataset but modifies the sampling distribution. To ensure
that mini-batches are class-balanced in expectation, we adopt a two-step generative process for drawing
a training example: first, we sample a labely∼Unif (Y), and subsequently sample an inputx from the
class-conditional empirical distributionˆp(·|y).
• Upweighting: Rather than altering the data distribution, this method modifies the objective function.
We define the class-imbalance ratio,γ, as the ratio of the majority class size to the minority class size.
We then scale the contribution of minority samples to the loss byγ. Formally, for a modelf, inputx,
and labely, the modified loss function is defined as:
Lbalanced(f(x),y) =w y ·ℓ(f(x),y)
Here, wy = γ if y belongs to the minority class, andwy = 1otherwise. Upweighting is mathematically
equivalent to upsampling in expectation over the sampling probabilities.
Datasets.We evaluate our approach on four standard benchmarks: Waterbirds (Welinder et al., 2010; Wah
et al., 2011; Sagawa et al., 2020a), CelebA (Z. Liu et al., 2015; Sagawa et al., 2020a), CivilComments (Borkan
et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2021), and MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020a). For each dataset,
we define the inputx, the target labely, and the spurious attributea. Note that Waterbirds is the only
dataset exhibiting a distribution shift between training and held-out sets, while MultiNLI is the only dataset
that is class-balanceda priori.
• Waterbirds(Welinder et al., 2010; Wah et al., 2011; Sagawa et al., 2020a):x consists of bird images
classified by species intoy∈{landbird,waterbird} . The spurious featurea represents the background
environment (land vs. water), where backgrounds are highly correlated with their corresponding species
classification.2
• CelebA(Z. Liu et al., 2015; Sagawa et al., 2020a):x consists of celebrity face images where the target
y is hair color (blond vs. non-blond). The spurious attributea is gender; specifically, the training
distribution is skewed such that the intersectional group of blond males is significantly underrepresented
2 The Waterbirds dataset is known to contain incorrect labels (Taghanaki et al., 2022). We utilize the standard uncorrected
labels for all of our results.
4
• CivilComments(Borkan et al., 2019; Koh et al., 2021):x comprises online comments where the target
y is toxicity. The spurious featurea captures the presence of demographic identities (e.g., race, gender,
religion). Following Sagawa et al., 2020a; Idrissi et al., 2022; Izmailov et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al.,
2023; LaBonte et al., 2023, we aggregate these identity categories into a single featurea, which is
correlated with the toxicity labely.3
• MultiNLI(Williams et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020a):xconsists of sentence pairs for natural language
inference wherey∈{contradiction,entailment,neutral} . The spurious featureadenotes the presence of
negation words in the second sentence; these negations are spuriously correlated with the contradiction
class.
For Waterbirds and CelebA we fine-tune ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet-1K (Rus-
sakovsky et al., 2015); for CivilComments and MultiNLI we use BERT-Base (Devlin et al., 2019) pretrained
on BookCorpus and English Wikipedia (Zhu et al., 2015). Our last-layer retraining (LLR) implementation
uses SGD without scheduling or explicit regularization. Following common practice, the held-out set is20%of
the training data for Waterbirds and half of the validation set for the other datasets (Kirichenko et al., 2023;
S. Qiu et al., 2023; LaBonte et al., 2023). Dataset specifics and training details appear in Appendices B.1
and B.2.
Methods.We adopt a unified terminology for the family of two-stage retraining methods studied in this
paper:
• Last-layer Retraining (LLR)refers to any procedure that(i)trains a feature extractor using standard
ERM on the training set, and(ii)reinitializes and retrains only the final linear layer on a held-out
dataset not seen during the first stage. Importantly, generic LLR makesno assumptionabout the
distribution of this held-out data—it may be arbitrarily imbalanced across classes or groups.
• Deep Feature Reweighting (DFR)(Izmailov et al., 2022; Kirichenko et al., 2023) is aspecific instanceof
LLR in which the held-out dataset is explicitlygroup-balanced: each groupg∈G is equally represented.
In practice, DFR freezes the ERM-trained feature extractor, constructs a subsampled group-balanced
held-out set (requiring access to group annotations), and fits a new linear classifier on this held-out set.
DFR can thus be viewed as an “idealized” variant of LLR designed to directly improve worst-group
accuracy.
• Class-balanced Last-layer Retraining (CB-LLR)(LaBonte et al., 2023) denotes another LLR variant
where the held-out data are balanced acrossclassesrather than groups. While class proportions are
equalized, group imbalance within each class often remains.
• Automatic Feature Reweighting (AFR)(S. Qiu et al., 2023) refers to the LLR variant in which the
held-out set is drawn from the same distribution as the training data, but the last layer is retrained using
aweighted loss functionintended to implicitly encourage group balance. The weighted loss function in
AFR prioritizes points upon which the ERM model performs poorly. In particular, AFR introduces a
weightωi for each held-out exampleias follows:
ωi = βyi exp(−γˆpi)∑M
j βyj exp(−γˆpj)
,(1)
where βy is one divided by the number of examples belonging to classy in the held-out set,M is the
total number of points in the held-out set,ˆpi is the probability for the correct classyi and γ≥ 0is a
tunable inverse temperature parameter.
3 There exists another version of CivilComments (used by E. Z. Liu et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022; S. Qiu et al., 2023) where
identity categories are not merged into one spurious feature. Both versions of CivilComments use the WILDS split (Koh et al.,
2021).
5
3 Neural collapse and implicit bias do not explain LLR
The interpretation of LLR methods as logistic regression on convergent ERM features lends itself to a possible
understanding combining a nonlinear model training phenomenon (neural collapse) and a logistic regression
phenomenon (implicit bias). We focus on the weakest measure of the neural collapse phenomenon, namely
that the penultimate layer features collapse to their class means over the course of ERM training (Papyan
et al., 2020). Importantly, neural collapse has been described as anoptimization phenomenon, occurring only
on the training set and not on held-out data (Hui et al., 2022). Therefore, while all group features collapse to
their class means on the training set, groups will not be collapsed in the held-out set. On the other hand,
implicit bias results state that linear classifiers trained via gradient descent with the unregularized logistic
loss — like the LLR classifier on the held-out set — converge in direction to the maximum-margin SVM
solution (Soudry et al., 2018; Ji and Telgarsky, 2019).
Combining these two ideas, we developed the following initial hypothesis (visualized in Figure 1). We
hypothesized that the model undergoes neural collapse during ERM training, causing the features to collapse
to their class means. These class means, however, are dominated by the largest groups in each class —
resulting in ERM learning a biased classifier. Nevertheless, during LLR, the features are not collapsed as the
held-out set was not seen during ERM (Hui et al., 2022). Since LLR learns a linear classifier on the held-out
set features, the implicit bias of gradient descent would then elicit a maximum-margin classifier that might
enjoy better robustness guarantees (see, e.g. (Chaudhuri et al., 2023)).
In this section, we present evidence whichdoes notsupport our initial hypothesis. Specifically, we find
that neural collapse either does not occur or occurs after the standard number of epochs of ERM training.
Moreover, convergence of the LLR classifier to the maximum-margin solution is extremely slow, and the
minimumℓ2-margin over the training data is not well-correlated with group accuracy.
3.1 Neural collapse may not occur during standard ERM training
We will measure the collapse of variability among class representations via a metric calledNC1 (Han et al.,
2022). For each classy∈Y and each training examplei∈ Ωy in that class, we denote the penultimate layer
feature vector ofiasf y,i. Neural collapse posits that features collapse to their respective class means
µy := 1
|Ωy|
∑
i∈Ωy
fy,i.
Wecomputeanempiricalmetricofthiscollapseusingtheintra-classcovariancematrixΣ A := 1
m
∑
y∈Y
∑
i∈Ωy (fi−
µy)(fi −µy)⊤, the global feature meanµG := 1
|Y|
∑
y∈Yµy, and the inter-class covariance matrixΣR :=
1
|Y|
∑
y∈Y(µy −µG)(µy −µG)⊤. We then define
NC1 := 1
|Y|tr(ΣAΣ†
R),
whereΣ †
R denotes the pseudo-inverse ofΣR. Neural collapse is formalized byNC1 →0(Han et al., 2022;
Kothapalli, 2023).4
Algorithm Design.Computing the neural collapse metric NC1 exactly requires constructing and storing
the matricesΣ A andΣ R, each of dimensionN×N , whereN is the feature dimension of the penultimate
layer. For modern neural networks, storing these matrices explicitly is memory-prohibitive. For example, in
the case of BERT-Base trained on CivilComments,N exceeds 150,000. To address this issue, we propose a
memory-efficient approximation based on theHutchinson trace estimator(Hutchinson, 1989).
4 A slightly less precise formulationΣA →0was studied by Papyan et al., 2020.
6
Algorithm 1 Memory efficient computation ofNC1 estimate.Our method combines the Hutchinson
trace estimator (Hutchinson, 1989) with efficient matrix-vector products forΣA andΣ R to estimateNC1 in
O(N)memory, instead of theO(N 2)memory required to computeNC1 exactly.
Require:Number of samplesK, access to matrix–vector productsΣ AxandΣ Rx.
Ensure:Approximation ˆNC1 ≈ 1
|Y|tr(ΣAΣ†
R).
1:forj= 1,...,Kdo
2:Sample random vectorz j ∼N(0,I N)▷Or Rademacher{±1} N
3:SolveΣ Rxj =zj forx j using an iterative solver▷ x j ≈Σ †
Rzj
4:Computey j ←Σ Axj
5:Compute scalar estimates j ←z⊤
j yj
6:end for
7:return ˆNC1 ← 1
K|Y|
∑K
j=1 sj
Table 1:Computing a stochastic estimate ofNC1 using Algorithm 1 is drastically more memory
efficient than computingNC1 exactly.We display the vectorized feature dimensionsN for ResNet-50 on
the vision datasets and BERT-Base on the language datasets. Exact computationNC1 requires storing two
N×N matrices of double-precision floating-point numbers, while our estimate ofNC1 only requires storing
three N dimensional vectors of double-precision floating-point numbers. We see that our stochastic estimate
ofNC 1 requires many orders of magnitude less memory.
Dataset Waterbirds CelebA CivilComments MultiNLI
Vectorized Feature DimensionN 100,352 100,352 168,960 98,304
Memory Requirement of Exact
NC1 Computation 150.06 GiB 150.06 GiB 425.4 GiB 144 GiB
Memory Requirement of Algorithm 1 2.297 MiB 2.297 MiB 3.867 MiB 2.25 MiB
The Hutchinson estimator provides a stochastic approximation for the trace of a matrix:
tr(A) =E[z ⊤Az]≈ 1
K
K∑
i=1
z⊤
i Azi,
where A∈R N×N, each random vectorzi ∈R N satisfies E[ziz⊤
i ] = I, and K is the number of random
samples used to approximate the expectation. Typically,zi is drawn from a Rademacher or standard normal
distribution, but any isotropic distribution suffices.
In our setting, we wish to approximateNC1 without ever explicitly formingΣA orΣ R. Note that both
matrices admit efficient matrix–vector products:
ΣAx= 1
m
∑
y∈Y
∑
i∈Ωy
(fi −µy)
(
(fi −µy)⊤x
)
,
ΣRx= 1
|Y|
∑
y∈Y
(µy −µG)
(
(µy −µG)⊤x
)
,
where µy is the class mean andµG the global mean. These expressions can be computed by streaming over the
data, requiring only a constant number ofN-dimensional vectors in memory. Combining these observations
yields a stochastic algorithm (Algorithm 1) capable of estimatingNC1 with onlyO(N)memory, compared to
the O(N2)memory required to computeNC1 exactly. We compare the precise memory requirements of both
methods in Table 1.
This procedure introduces two sources of error:
7
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 2:Collapse of class feature variability occurs after standard ERM training, if at all.We
plot a stochastic estimate of the empirical metric of neural collapseNC1 using Algorithm 1 throughout
training a ResNet-50 on Waterbirds and CelebA and a BERT-Base on CivilComments and MultiNLI. For
Waterbirds and CelebA,NC1 is computed usingm = 10random vectors, while for CivilComments and
MultiNLI, NC1 is computed usingm= 3random vectors. Each plot displays the mean and standard deviation
for NC1 computed across3experimental seeds. We also display the meanNC1 metric computed on the
features of the held-out set at the end of training (EoT).
1.Linear solve error: Each iterative solve ofΣRxj =zj is performed to finite precision.
2.Monte Carlo error: The Hutchinson estimator uses finite samplesKto approximate an expectation.
Both sources of error can be reduced arbitrarily by increasing computation time. Notably, the variance of the
Hutchinson estimator decreases with the feature dimensionN (Hutchinson, 1989), so fewer samplesK are
required for larger models, corresponding to our regime of primary interest.
Results.If neural collapse plays a significant role in ERM learning a biased classifier prior to LLR, then a
collapse in feature variability should be observed during a standard number of ERM training steps. We display
NC1 for a ResNet-50 on Waterbirds and CelebA and for a BERT-Base for CivilComments and MultiNLI
in Figure 2. We train on both datasets for much longer than normal and denote the standard number of
training steps in the spurious correlations literature (Sagawa et al., 2020a; Kirichenko et al., 2023) as dotted
vertical lines in Figure 2.
In Figure 2, we see that complete neural collapse does not occur on any dataset during the standard
number of training steps. In fact, even after training more than3×the standard number of steps we still
do not seeNC1 →0. Beyond an initial decrease in the first few epochs of training,NC1 computed on the
training set remains relatively constant and comparable toNC1 computed on the held-out. For all datasets,
the gap betweenNC1 computed on the training and held-out sets are within an order of magnitude. Thus, it
is unlikely that neural collapse significantly influences the behavior of the ERM classifier prior to LLR in
standard group robustness benchmarks and training protocols.
3.2 The minimum margin of LLR is not predictive of robust generalization
In classical learning theory, maximizing minimumℓ2 training margin is well understood to provide good
generalization upper bounds (Bartlett et al., 1998; Koltchinskii and Panchenko, 2002). Therefore, assuming
that the features of the held-out set are similar in distribution to the features of the test set, we should expect
that choosing a classifier which maximizes theℓ2 margin on the held-out set will lead to good generalization.
Letf θ :X→{−1,1}be a binary linear classifier defined by
fθ(x) =x⊤θ+b.
8
Table 2:Group test accuracy is not well-correlated with the minimumℓ2 margin on the held-
out set.We compute the Pearson correlation coefficient between the test group accuracy of a ResNet-50
(BERT-Base) trained on Waterbirds and CelebA (CivilComments and MultiNLI) and the minimum margin
of each group in the held-out set across3experimental seeds. We see that held-out set minimumℓ2 margin is
not well correlated with test accuracy. A complete breakdown of each dataset including distribution and
group sizes is included in Table 5.
Dataset Group 0 Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5
Waterbirds 0.279 0.285 0.288 0.266 — —
CelebA 0.526 0.473 0.458 0.478 — —
CivilComments -0.074 -0.143 -0.008 0.055 — —
MultiNLI 0.303 0.497 0.279 0.210 0.221 0.431
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 3:Convergence of LLR to the maximum-margin SVM solution is extremely slow.We
plot the mean and standard deviation over3experimental seeds of the directional errorˆErr between the
last layer weights of a neural network model and an SVM (both trained on the features of the held-out set).
We use a ResNet-50 for Waterbirds and CelebA and a BERT-Base for CivilComments and MultiNLI. Here,
ˆErr := || θNN
||θNN||2
− θSVM
||θSVM||2
||2, whereθNN denotes the last layer weights andθSVM denotes the weights of an
SVM trained on the held-out set features.
Let D:= {(xi,yi)}n
i=1 ⊆X×{− 1,1}be the training set andC:= {xi : yif(xi) > 0}be the set of points
correctly classified byfθ. Then, we define the minimumℓ2-margin offθ to be
min
xi∈C
yifθ(xi).
The hard margin SVM is a binary linear classifier formulated through the following optimization problem:
min
θ,b
1
2||θ||2
2 s.t.∀(x i,yi)∈D, y i(x⊤
i θ+b)≥1.
The classifierθSVM learned by a hard margin SVM is the separating hyperplane which maximizes the minimum
ℓ2-margin. Soudry et al., 2018 show that linear classifiers trained via GD with the unregularized logistic loss
converge in direction toθSVM. In particular, || θGD
||θGD||2
− θSVM
||θSVM||2
||2 →0at a worst-case rate ofO(log logt
logt )
where t is the number of gradient steps. This result can also be extended to the nonseparable case, though
as one might expect, the implicit bias is more complex (Ji and Telgarsky, 2019). The SVM solution was
recently studied in the context of group robustness by Chaudhuri et al., 2023, who showed that under certain
conditions on the tail of the data distribution,θSVM converges to the classifier with optimal worst-group
accuracy as the number of data points goes to infinity.
If LLR maximizes the minimum training margin on the held-out set and this results in a debiased classifier,
then we should see a high correlation between the size of group minimum margin and group test accuracy
9
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 4:LLR performance is determined by held-out set group balance.We compare the test
WGA of ERM and LLR models while controlling the group balance of the training and held-out sets. We
use ResNet-50 for the vision datasets and BERT-Base for the language datasets, and we plot the mean and
standard deviation over 3 experimental seeds. We compute the Pearson correlation coefficient between the
ERM test WGA and the LLR test WGA for each dataset; the presented coefficients are averaged over all 5
group ratios. We find that LLR worst-group accuracy correlates strongly with change in group balance; in
particular, LLR tends to improve over ERM if and only if the held-out set has better group balance.
(i.e.,minority group points lie near the decision boundary). However, in Table 2, we find that the minimum
training margin for a group is not correlated with the test accuracy for that group.
Moreover, convergence towardsθSVM is slow in practice. We perform LLR on the held-out sets of
Waterbirds, CelebA and CivilComments via SGD with learning rate0.001and unregularized logistic loss,
and we plot the directional error withθSVM in Figure 3. In line with the slowO(log logt
logt )rate from Soudry
et al., 2018, we find that even after10×the number of standard training steps, the LLR classifier has yet to
converge toθSVM. As the minimumℓ2-margin is not well-correlated with group test accuracy and convergence
to θSVM is slow, we conclude that our initial hypothesis does not sufficiently explain the robustness gains of
LLR on an imbalanced held-out set.
4 LLR performance is primarily due to group balance in the held-
out set
The negative results of Section 3 prompted us to reconsider our initial hypothesis. We now present strong
evidence for an alternative hypothesis: that the success of LLR is primarily due tobetter group balancein the
held-out set as compared to the training set. In particular, we argue that the “free lunch” interpretation
of CB-LLR (LaBonte et al., 2023) is more likely to arise due to improving class balancing over the ERM
baseline than an implicit-bias advantage of LLR. Similarly, AFR (S. Qiu et al., 2023) performs implicit
group-balancing via loss reweighting on the held-out set. While LLR may not be as “unreasonably effective”
as previously claimed, we do see that it can surprisingly recover the WGA of an optimally class-balanced
model even when ERM was not optimally class-balanced. Generally, LLR remains a highly effective technique
when group annotations (or proxies thereof) are available only on the held-out set.
4.1 LLR worst-group accuracy correlates strongly with ERM vs LLR group
ratio
To isolate the effect of group balance on LLR, we perform an ablation study on the ERM and LLR group
ratios. We directly control the group ratio — defined as the ratio between the number of minority group
points and the number of majority group points — by removing data from the held-out set until the desired
group ratio is achieved for each class, keeping the total data in each stage constant. Fixing majority and
minority group sizes also ensures that each dataset is ultimately class-balanced (i.e.,we use thesubsetting
10
class-balancing technique).
We vary the group ratios for both the ERM training set and the LLR held-out set between0.05and1 .0.
A group ratio of1.0corresponds to the majority and minority groups having equal size, whereas a group
ratio of0 .05implies that the minority groups are5%the size of the majority groups. Our results are detailed
in Figure 4. For a fair comparison, the ERM-trained models are trained with the held-out set added in; as an
example, on Waterbirds we compare LLR with20%of data following an ERM with80%of data (colored line)
to an ERM with100%of data (gray line). Note that LLR with a group ratio of1.0corresponds to DFR, as
this reflects perfectly group-balanced data.
We find that LLR performance correlates strongly with the change in group balance between the training
and held-out datasets. LLR only shows significant gains over ERM when it is trained on a held-out set with
ahigher group ratiothan the ERM training set, and vice versa. Moreover, the test WGA of LLR trained
with a fixed group ratio is remarkably similar to the test WGA of ERM trained with that same group ratio
(observed most impressively on CivilComments). In Figure 4, we detail the average Pearson correlation
coefficients between ERM test WGA and LLR test WGA. Specifically, we compute the Pearson correlation
coefficients between ERM test WGA (gray line) and LLR test WGA (colored line) for all group ratios in
(0.05,0.1,0.2,0.5,1.0), and average over group ratios. These average correlation coefficients reveal a strong
trend, withr >0.9on Waterbirds and CivilComments. We include the full (non-averaged) coefficients in
Appendix A.
These results indicate that the two-stage training procedure of LLR methods isnotfundamentally oriented
towards learning a debiased classifier as we initially hypothesized. Rather, some form of group-balancing is
generally necessary to maximally capture LLR robustness benefits. Moreover, our results suggest that LLR
methods are limited by how well they improve the group ratio, and thus DFR likely upper bounds the WGA
of any LLR method which does not utilize group annotations.
4.2 LLR can recover optimally class-balanced WGA
In the previous section, we explicitly controlled group ratios to evaluate LLR worst-group accuracy in a
fine-grained ablation study. A remaining question is whether our insights hold in more realistic settings,
i.e.,across benchmark datasets with standard group ratios and data balancing methodologies. This section
answers this question in the affirmative through an empirical study on the interaction between LLR and
class-balancing, a common data pre-processing method shown to approach more complicated group robustness
algorithms (Idrissi et al., 2022). Because groups are defined as a refinement of classes, each of these class-
balancing strategies implicitly induces some degree of group-balancing without requiring group labels. This
makes class-balancing a natural baseline for understanding when explicit group-balancing is necessary and
how much robustness can be achieved without group annotations.
We utilize three standard techniques for class-balancing, detailed in Section 2:subsetting, wherein the
size of each class is reduced to match that of the smallest class;upsampling, wherein sampling probabilities
for each class are adjusted so that mini-batches are class-balanced in expectation; andupweighting, wherein
minority class samples are assigned larger loss weights (LaBonte et al., 2024). We compare ERM and LLR
trained with all permutations of these class-balancing methods and display the results in Figure 5.
Our first finding is that our insights from Section 4.1 hold in realistic benchmark datasets with standard
group ratios (without our explicit control from earlier). In particular, consider only ERM and LLR with no
class-balancing — the leftmost gray and blue “No CB” bars respectively in each subplot of Figure 5. We
can see that in all four subplots, No CB LLR either worsens No CB ERM worst-group accuracy, or they lie
within one standard deviation of each other. This suggests that without additional intervention in the form
of class-balancing, LLR does not improve over ERM with the same group ratio. This is especially apparent
in MultiNLI, the only dataset which is class-balanceda priori; ERM is more robust than any instantiation of
LLR on this dataset, echoing earlier findings of LaBonte et al., 2023.
Our second, and more surprising, finding is that CB-LLR (with any class-balancing method) can recover
optimally class-balanced WGAeven when ERM was not optimally class-balanced. For example, upweighting
ERM is very poor on CelebA, but running CB-LLR recovers the (best) subsetting ERM worst-group accuracy
within one standard deviation. Prior work (LaBonte et al., 2024) has shown that subsetting on Waterbirds,
11
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 5:LLR can recover optimally class-balanced WGA.We compare the test WGA of ERM
(trained on 100% of the data) against LLR (trained on a held-out subset with the same group ratio). For both
approaches, we evaluate four class-balancing strategies:no class balancing (No CB),upsampling,subsetting,
andupweighting(defined in Section 2). We use ResNet-50 for the vision datasets and BERT-Base for the
language datasets. We plot mean and standard deviation across 3 seeds. Eachx-axis group corresponds to
the class-balancing method used to train the ERM baseline (gray bar). Within each group, we compare this
ERM model to the four LLR variants (colored bars), each using the corresponding class-balancing method.
and upsampling and upweighting on CelebA and CivilComments, can cause substantial degradation in WGA.
Importantly, this degradation arises from the optimization dynamics of ERM rather than the class distribution
itself. Because CB-LLR performs only linear retraining on a fixed representation, it does not suffer from the
same instability.
Before moving on, we remark that Figure 5 suggests LLR may yet trump optimally class-balanced ERM in
certain edge cases. Specifically: subsetting ERM/upweighting LLR on CelebA, upsampling ERM/subsetting
LLR on CivilComments, and upweighting ERM/upsampling LLR on CivilComments exceed all ERMs by
at least one standard deviation. It is possible that characteristics of thespecific data selectedfor LLR are
influential in these cases (see,e.g.,previous work by LaBonte et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2025).
4.3 Recent LLR methods succeed via implicit group-balancing
In this section, we reconcile our findings with the literature by asking the following question: if LLR on
an equally-imbalanced held-out set does not significantly improve WGA, how do LLR methods like CB-
LLR (LaBonte et al., 2023) and AFR (S. Qiu et al., 2023) achieve state-of-the-art group robustness without
group annotations? We argue that these techniques enjoy success primarily due toimplicit group-balancing,
wherein the held-out set is effectively more group-balanced than the training set due to user interventions.
The CB-LLR results of LaBonte et al., 2023 use class-balancedupsamplingfor both ERM and LLR.
Since upsampling is a suboptimal procedure for ERM on CelebA and CivilComments (see Figure 5 as well
as LaBonte et al., 2024), LLR has considerably more room to improve over this baseline. In other words,
the strong CB-LLR performance is largely explained by the fact that the ERM model it starts from is
itself degraded by suboptimal class-balancing. The improved WGA on Waterbirds is more simply explained:
following standard practice (Kirichenko et al., 2023), CB-LLR is run on50%of the Waterbirds validation set
(which is more group-balanced!) instead of20%of the training set, which is group-imbalancedas we do in
Figure 5.
Compared to standard LLR, which utilizes the cross-entropy loss only, AFR incorporates a weighted
loss function which prioritizes points upon which the ERM model performs poorly (detailed in Equation 1).
Specifically, AFR introduces a weight for each held-out examplei proportional toexp(−γˆpi), where ˆpi is
the probability for the correct classyi and γ≥ 0is a tunable temperature parameter.5 Therefore, the AFR
5 Loss-based adjustments are common among group robustness methods not using group annotations,e.g.,E. Z. Liu et al.,
2021.
12
held-out set effectively has better group balance than the training set, in the sense of theupweightingmethod.
Notably, the ablations of S. Qiu et al., 2023 show that settingγ= 0reduces to CB-LLR with upweighting!
A positive takeaway from our analysis in this section is that LLR is exceptional atleveraging data
interventions on exclusively the held-out set. That is, given a principled technique to increase group balance
(e.g.,class-balancing in CB-LLR, loss-based upweighting in AFR, or disagreement in SELF (LaBonte et al.,
2023)), one need only apply the intervention to a limited number of held-out data and retrain the last layer to
observe robustness gains matching or exceeding that obtained by applying the same method to ERM (which
would require applying the intervention to the much larger training set). Overall, the strength of LLR is its
group-annotation and computational efficiency, and it remains a powerful method for group robustness.
5 Discussion
In this paper, we proposed and eventually rejected a hypothesis explaining the success of LLR through neural
collapse and the implicit bias of gradient descent. However, we also presented strong evidence supporting
an alternate hypothesis: that the improved WGA of LLR is primarily due to improved group balance in
the held-out set. One consequence of this observation is that LLR can recover the WGA of an optimally
class-balanced model, even if ERM was not optimally class-balanced. Overall, LLR remains an effective
method to improve worst-group accuracy, especially if a limited number of group annotations are available
(e.g.,DFR), or in conjunction with implicit group-balancing techniques (e.g.,CB-LLR, SELF, and AFR).
Our work highlights the need for further research towards two open questions. First, how do neural
networks learn both core and spurious features during ERM training? Recent progress towards this question,
e.g.,by G. Qiu et al., 2024, is heartening, but the fact remains that we have no substantial theoretical
justification for this key assumption underlying LLR (Izmailov et al., 2022). Second, what is the mechanism
by which LLR with better group ratio than ERM reweights the core and spurious features? Addressing this
second question is necessary for a complete understanding of LLR, and it is possible this mechanism could be
leveraged to design algorithms which target WGA more explicitly than reweighting via logistic regression.
Acknowledgments.We thank Jacob Abernethy for compute assistance. V.M. acknowledges support from
the NSF (awards CCF-223915 and IIS-2212182), Google Research, Adobe Research and Amazon Research.
13
References
Bartlett, Peter, Yoav Freund, Wee Sun Lee, and Robert E Schapire (1998). “Boosting the margin: A new
explanation for the effectiveness of voting methods”. In:The Annals of Statistics26.5, pp. 1651–1686
(cit. on pp. 3, 8).
Beery, Sara, Grant van Horn, and Pietro Perona (2018). “Recognition in Terra Incognita”. In:European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)(cit. on p. 2).
Borkan, Daniel, Lucas Dixon, Jeffrey Sorenson, Nithium Thain, and Lucy Vasserman (2019). “Nuanced
metrics for measuring unintended bias with real data for text classification”. In:World Wide Web (WWW)
(cit. on pp. 4, 5).
Chaudhuri, Kamalika, Kartik Ahuja, Martin Arjovsky, and David Lopez-Paz (2023). “Why does throwing
away data improve worst-group error?” In:International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)(cit. on
pp. 2, 3, 6, 9).
Chen, Zhikang, Min Zhang, Sen Cui, Haoxuan Li, Gang Niu, Mingming Gong, Changshui Zhang, and Kun
Zhang (2024). “Neural Collapse Inspired Feature Alignment for Out-of-Distribution Generalization”. In:
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)(cit. on p. 3).
Chouldechova, Alexandra (2016). “Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism
prediction instruments”. In:Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine
Learning (FATML)(cit. on p. 1).
Dang, Hien, Tho Tran, Stanley Osher, Hung Tran-The, Nhat Ho, and Tan Nguyen (2023).Neural Collapse
in Deep Linear Networks: From Balanced to Imbalanced Data. arXiv:2301.00437 [cs.LG].url: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2301.00437(cit. on p. 3).
Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova (2019). “BERT: Pre-training of
Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding”. In:North American Association for
Computational Linguistics (NAACL)(cit. on pp. 5, 24).
Falcon, William and the PyTorch Lightning maintainers and contributors (2019). “PyTorch Lightning”. In:
GitHub(cit. on p. 24).
Fang, Cong, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J. Su (Oct. 2021). “Exploring deep neural networks via
layer-peeled model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training”. In:Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences118.43.issn: 1091-6490.doi:10.1073/pnas.2103091118.url:http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2103091118(cit. on p. 3).
Geirhos, Robert, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann (2020). “Shortcut learning in deep neural networks”. In:Nature Machine
Intelligence2 (1), pp. 665–673 (cit. on pp. 1, 2).
Han, X.Y., Vardan Papyan, and David Donoho (2022). “Neural Collapse Under MSE Loss: Proximity to
and Dynamics on the Central Path”. In:International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
(cit. on pp. 3, 6).
Harris, Charles R., K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus,
Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández del Río,
Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren Weckesser,
Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant (2020). “Array programming with NumPy”.
In:Nature585.1, pp. 357–362 (cit. on p. 24).
He, Kaiming, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun (2016). “Deep Residual Learning for Image
Recognition”. In:Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)(cit. on pp. 5, 24).
Hong, Wanli and Shuyang Ling (2023).Neural Collapse for Unconstrained Feature Model under Cross-entropy
Loss with Imbalanced Data. arXiv:2309.09725 [stat.ML].url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.09725
(cit. on p. 3).
Hui, Like, Mikhail Belkin, and Preetum Nakkiran (2022). “Limitations of Neural Collapse for Understanding
Generalization in Deep Learning”. In:arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08384(cit. on pp. 2, 3, 6).
Hunter, John D. (2007). “Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment”. In:Computing in Science & Engineering
9.3, pp. 90–95 (cit. on p. 24).
14
Hutchinson, Michael F. (1989). “A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for Laplacian
smoothing splines”. In:Communications in Statistics — Simulation and Computation18.3, pp. 1059–1076
(cit. on pp. 2, 6–8).
Idrissi, Badr Youbi, Martín Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz (2022). “Simple data
balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy”. In:Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning
(CLeaR)(cit. on pp. 2, 5, 11).
Izmailov, Pavel, Polina Kirichenko, Nate Gruver, and Andrew Gordon Wilson (2022). “On Feature Learning
in the Presence of Spurious Correlations”. In:Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS)(cit. on pp. 1, 2, 5, 13, 24).
Ji, Ziwei and Matus Telgarsky (2019). “The implicit bias of gradient descent on nonseparable data”. In:
Conference on Learning Theory (COLT)(cit. on pp. 3, 6, 9).
Kirichenko, Polina, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson (2023). “Last Layer Re-Training is Sufficient
for Robustness to Spurious Correlations”. In:International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR)(cit. on pp. 1–3, 5, 8, 12).
Koh, Pang Wei, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Balsubramani,
Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Sara Beery, Jure Leskovec, Anshul Kundaje,
Emma Pierson, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and Percy Liang (2021). “WILDS: A Benchmark of in-
the-Wild Distribution Shifts”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)(cit. on pp. 4,
5).
Koltchinskii, Vladimir and Dmitry Panchenko (2002). “Empirical margin distributions and bounding the
generalization error of combined classifiers”. In:The Annals of Statistics30.1, pp. 1–50 (cit. on pp. 3, 8).
Kothapalli, Vignesh (2023). “Neural Collapse: A Review on Modelling Principles and Generalization”. In:
Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR)(cit. on p. 6).
LaBonte, Tyler (2023).Milkshake: Quick and extendable experimentation with classification models.http:
//github.com/tmlabonte/milkshake(cit. on p. 24).
LaBonte, Tyler, John C. Hill, Xinchen Zhang, Vidya Muthukumar, and Abhishek Kumar (2024). “The Group
Robustness is in the Details: Revisiting Finetuning under Spurious Correlations”. In:Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)(cit. on pp. 2, 4, 11, 12, 18).
LaBonte, Tyler, Vidya Muthukumar, and Abhishek Kumar (2023). “Towards Last-layer Retraining for Group
Robustness with Fewer Annotations”. In:Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
(cit. on pp. 1, 2, 5, 10–13).
Liu, Evan Zheran, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S. Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn (2021). “Just Train Twice: Improving Group Robustness without Training
Group Information”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)(cit. on pp. 2, 5, 12, 20).
Liu, Ziwei, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang (2015). “Deep Learning Face Attributes in the Wild”.
In:International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)(cit. on p. 4).
Lu, Shenyu, Junyi Chai, and Xiaoqian Wang (2024). “Neural Collapse Inspired Debiased Representation
Learning for Min-max Fairness”. In:Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD)(cit. on
p. 3).
Oren, Yonatan, Shiori Sagawa, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang (2019). “Distributionally Robust
Language Modeling”. In:Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)
(cit. on p. 1).
Papyan, Vardan, X.Y. Han, and David Donoho (2020). “Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
phase of deep learning training”. In:Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS)117.40,
pp. 24652–24663 (cit. on pp. 3, 6).
Park, Juhyeon, Seokhyeon Jeong, and Taesup Moon (2025). “TLDR: Text Based Last-layer Retraining for
Debiasing Image Classifiers”. In:Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)(cit. on
p. 2).
Paszke, Adam, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Zeming Lin,
Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer (2017). “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch”. In:
15
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Workshop on Automatic Differentiation
(cit. on p. 24).
Paszke, Adam, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Z. Yang, Zach
DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
Soumith Chintala (2019). “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library”. In:
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)(cit. on p. 24).
Qiao, Rui, Zhaoxuan Wu, Jingtan Wang, Pang Wei Koh, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low (2025). “Group-robust
Sample Reweighting for Subpopulation Shifts via Influence Functions”. In:International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR)(cit. on pp. 2, 12).
Qiu, GuanWen, Da Kuang, and Surbhi Goel (2024). “Complexity Matters: Feature Learning in the Presence
of Spurious Correlations”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)(cit. on pp. 2, 13).
Qiu, Shikai, Andres Potapczynski, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson (2023). “Simple and Fast
Group Robustness by Automatic Feature Reweighting”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML)(cit. on pp. 1, 2, 5, 10, 12, 13).
Russakovsky, Olga, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej
Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei (2015). “ImageNet
Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge”. In:International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV)115.1,
pp. 211–252 (cit. on pp. 5, 24).
Sagawa, Shiori, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang (2020a). “Distributionally Robust
Neural Networks for Group Shifts: On the Importance of Regularization for Worst-Case Generalization”.
In:International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)(cit. on pp. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8).
Sagawa, Shiori, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang (2020b). “An investigation of why
overparameterization exacerbates spurious correlations”. In:International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML)(cit. on p. 20).
Shah, Harshay, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli (2020). “The
Pitfalls of Simplicity Bias in Neural Networks”. In:Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS)(cit. on p. 1).
Shwartz-Ziv, Ravid, Micah Goldblum, Yucen Lily Li, C. Bayan Bruss, and Andrew Gordon Wilson (2023).
“Simplifying Neural Network Training Under Class Imbalance”. In:Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS)(cit. on p. 2).
Soudry, Daniel, Elad Hoffer, Mor Shpigel Nacson, Suriya Gunasekar, and Nathan Srebro (2018). “The Implicit
Bias of Gradient Descent on Separable Data”. In:Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR)19,
pp. 1–57 (cit. on pp. 3, 6, 9, 10).
Stromberg, Nathan, Rohan Ayyagari, Monica Welfert, Sanmi Koyejo, and Lalitha Sankar (2024). “Robustness
to Subpopulation Shift with Domain Label Noise via Regularized Annotation of Domains”. In:Transactions
on Machine Learning Research (TMLR)(cit. on p. 2).
Taghanaki, Saeid Asgari, Aliasghar Khani, Fereshte Khani, Ali Gholami, Linh Trana, Ali Mahdavi-Amiri,
and Ghassan Hamarneh (2022). “MaskTune: Mitigating Spurious Correlations by Forcing to Explore”. In:
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)(cit. on p. 4).
Thrampoulidis, Christos, Ganesh R. Kini, Vala Vakilian, and Tina Behnia (2022).Imbalance Trouble: Revisiting
Neural-Collapse Geometry. arXiv:2208.05512 [cs.LG].url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.05512
(cit. on p. 3).
TorchVision maintainers and contributors (2016). “TorchVision: PyTorch’s Computer Vision library”. In:
GitHub(cit. on p. 24).
Vapnik, Vladimir (1998).Statistical Learning Theory. Wiley (cit. on p. 1).
Wah, Catherine, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie (2011).The Caltech-UCSD
Birds-200-2011 Dataset. Tech. rep. California Institute of Technology (cit. on p. 4).
Wang, Yining, Junjie Sun, Chenyue Wang, Mi Zhang, and Min Yang (2024). “Navigate Beyond Shortcuts:
Debiased Learning through the Lens of Neural Collapse”. In:Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR)(cit. on p. 3).
16
Welinder, Peter, Steve Branson, Takeshi Mita, Catherine Wah, Florian Schroff, Serge Belongie, and Pietro
Perona (2010).Caltech-UCSD Birds 200. Tech. rep. California Institute of Technology (cit. on p. 4).
Williams, Adina, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman (2018). “A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
sentence understanding through inference”. In:North American Association for Computational Linguistics
(NAACL)(cit. on pp. 4, 5, 24).
Wolf, Thomas, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric
Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara
Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin
Lhoest, and Alexander Rush (2020). “Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing”. In:
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) System Demonstrations
(cit. on p. 24).
Xiao, Kai Yuanqing, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Mądry (2021). “Noise or Signal: The Role
of Image Backgrounds in Object Recognition”. In:International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR)(cit. on p. 2).
Xu, Jingxuan, Wuyang Chen, Linyi Li, Yao Zhao, and Yunchao Wei (2025). “Collapsed Language Models
Promote Fairness”. In:International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)(cit. on p. 3).
Ye, Haotian, James Zou, and Linjun Zhang (2023). “Freeze then Train: Towards Provable Representation
Learning under Spurious Correlations and Feature Noise”. In:International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS)(cit. on p. 2).
Zech, John R., Marcus A. Badgeley, Manway Liu, Anthony B. Costa, Joseph J. Titano, and Eric Karl
Oermann (2018). “Variable generalization performance of a deep learning model to detect pneumonia in
chest radiographs: A cross-sectional study”. In:PLoS Medicine15 (11) (cit. on p. 1).
Zhang, Michael, Nimit S. Sohoni, Hongyang R. Zhang, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher Ré (2022). “Correct-N-
Contrast: A Contrastive Approach for Improving Robustness to Spurious Correlations”. In:International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)(cit. on p. 5).
Zhu, Yukun, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Torralba, and Sanja
Fidler (2015). “Aligning Books and Movies: Towards Story-Like Visual Explanations by Watching Movies
and Reading Books”. In:International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)(cit. on pp. 5, 24).
17
A Additional experiments
In this section, we present additional experiments deferred from the main body of the work.
A.1 Explicit group-balancing
First, we study an extension of the implicit group-balancing discussion from Section 4.3 to explicit group-
balancing. As discussed in Section 2, we investigate three explicit balancing methods: subsetting, upsampling,
and upweighting. It has previously been observed that using upsampling or upweighting for class-balancing
can result in drastic decreases to test WGA during training (LaBonte et al., 2024). If the performance
improvement from LLR is indeed primarily due to the implicit group-balancing achieved by class-balancing,
we would expect similar degradation when we explicitly group-balance using these same techniques.
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 6:Group-balancing with upsampling and upweighting can lead to catastrophic collapse.
We compare three group-balancing methods:subsetting,upsampling, andupweighting. We plot the mean and
standard deviation over3experimental seeds for a ResNet-50 on the vision datasets and a BERT-Base on
the language datasets. We note a dramatic decrease in test WGA during training for both upsampling and
upweighting on CelebA and CivilComments. We also see a collapse in WGA for upweighting on MultiNLI.
Figure 6 shows how different group-balancing methods affect WGA during training. Similar to the
class-balancing results, we find that upsampling and upweighting cause substantial degradation on CelebA
and CivilComments. Additionally, group-balanced upweighting leads to degradation on MultiNLI and a mild
decrease in WGA on Waterbirds. Overall, the training dynamics induced by subsetting, upweighting, and
upsampling for group-balancing resemble those observed for class-balancing in LaBonte et al. (2024): most
group-balancing methods behave similarly and do not exhibit degradation.
ThekeyexceptionsareMultiNLI—wherethedatasetisnaturallyclass-balancedbutnotgroup-balanced—and
subsetting on Waterbirds. For MultiNLI, the lack of class imbalance causes group-balanced upweighting
to overweight noisy minority signals, leading to degradation. For Waterbirds, class-balanced subsetting
disproportionately removes examples from its already small minority groups, harming performance, whereas
group-balanced subsetting avoids this issue and therefore performs well.
In Figure 7, we compare the test WGA of class-balanced ERM and group-balanced DFR. This comparison
is motivated by the practical reality that class-balancing is widely used when group annotations are unavailable,
and is often assumed to provide a good surrogate for group-balancing. However, recent work suggests that
class-balancing can interact with robustness in subtle and dataset-dependent ways. By directly contrasting
class-balanced ERM with group-balanced DFR, we aim to isolate the extent to which robustness gains arise
from improved representations versus improved group balance. Our results show that while class-balancing
affects ERM and DFR substantially, explicit group-balancing still yields consistent WGA improvements,
demonstrating its unique value when group annotations—even limited ones—are available.
18
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure7:Choiceofgroup-balancingmethodisimportanttoDFRsuccess.Wecompare class-balanced
ERM to group-balanced DFR across three balancing methods: subsetting, upsampling, and upweighting.
We plot the mean and standard deviation over 3 experimental seeds for a ResNet-50 on the vision datasets
and a BERT-Base on the language datasets. We note that the choice of balancing method has a dramatic
effect on the test WGA for both ERM and DFR. For instance, on CelebA, DFR with subsetting consistently
outperforms DFR with upsampling or upweighting, regardless of the ERM balancing method used.
19
A.2 Supplemental plots for average accuracy
In this section, we provide corresponding figures to those in the main text displaying average accuracy (AA)
instead of worst-group accuracy. While group robustness methods are known in some cases to degrade average
accuracy (Sagawa et al., 2020b; E. Z. Liu et al., 2021), our results show that LLR generally enjoys similar
average accuracy compared to ERM.
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 8: Test average accuracy (AA) for ERM, upsampling, subsetting, and upweighting across the
Waterbirds, CelebA, CivilComments, and MultiNLI datasets. Across all four benchmarks, average accuracy
remains uniformly high and nearly identical across class-balancing methods, indicating that these interventions
primarily affect minority-group robustness rather than overall predictive performance.
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 9: Test average accuracy (AA) over training epochs for ERM, upsampling, subsetting, and upweighting
on the Waterbirds, CelebA, CivilComments, and MultiNLI datasets. With the exception of subsetting —
which consistently underperforms due to lack of data – the class-balancing strategies produce only modest
variation in average accuracy compared to their much larger impact on worst-group accuracy.
20
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 10: Test average accuracy of last-layer retraining (LLR) when the underlying ERM model is trained with
no class-balancing, upsampling, subsetting, or upweighting, across the Waterbirds, CelebA, CivilComments,
and MultiNLI datasets. Across all benchmarks, LLR produces similar Test AA regardless of the ERM
class-balancing strategy, indicating that the overall predictive performance of LLR is largely insensitive to
the class distribution used during ERM training, even though worst-group accuracy differs substantially in
the corresponding WGA results.
(a) Waterbirds (b) CelebA (c) CivilComments (d) MultiNLI
Figure 11: Test average accuracy of last-layer retraining (LLR) under varying group ratios, evaluated across
Waterbirds, CelebA, CivilComments, and MultiNLI. For each dataset, we report LLR performance when
applied to ERM models trained with subsetting, upsampling, and no class-balancing. Across all group ratios,
Test AA remains remarkably stable, indicating that LLR’s overall predictive performance is largely insensitive
to the choice of regularization — even though worst-group accuracy can vary substantially under the same
settings.
21
A.3 Supplemental correlation coefficients
In this section, we provide full Pearson correlation coefficients for the plots with averaged coefficients over
group ratios, namely Figure 4 and Figure 11.
Table 3: Full Pearson correlation coefficients for Figure 4. Note that the displayed Pearson correlation
coefficients in Figure 4 are the coefficients in this table averaged across rows.
LLR Group Ratio 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0
Waterbirds 0.915 0.950 0.961 0.937 0.898
CelebA 0.793 0.929 0.348 0.820 0.834
CivilComments 0.999 0.999 0.998 0.996 0.995
MultiNLI 0.740 0.757 0.786 0.823 0.871
Table 4: Full Pearson correlation coefficients for Figure 11. Note that the displayed Pearson correlation
coefficients in Figure 11 are the coefficients in this table averaged across rows.
LLR Group Ratio 0.05 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.00
Waterbirds 0.791 0.791 0.791 0.535 0.875
CelebA -0.707 0.195 -0.022 0.457 -0.468
CivilComments 0.970 0.975 0.984 0.989 0.979
MultiNLI 0.976 0.976 0.976 0.966 0.967
22
B Additional dataset and training details
B.1 Dataset details
We study four benchmarks for group robustness across vision and language tasks, outlined in Section 2 and
detailed in Table 5.
Table 5:Dataset composition.The class probabilities change dramatically when conditioned on the
spurious feature. Note that Waterbirds is the only dataset that has a distribution shift and MultiNLI is
the only dataset which is class-balanceda priori. The minority groups within each class are denoted by an
asterisk in the “Num” column. Probabilities may not sum to1due to rounding.
Dataset GroupgTraining distributionˆpData quantity
Num ClassySpurioussˆp(y) ˆp(g) ˆp(y|s)Train Val Test
Waterbirds
0landbird land .768 .730 .984 3498 467 2225
1* landbird water.038 .148 184 466 2225
2* waterbird land .232 .012 .016 56 133 642
3waterbird water.220 .852 1057 133 642
CelebA
0non-blond female .851 .440 .758 71629 8535 9767
1* non-blond male.411 .980 66874 8276 7535
2blond female .149 .141 .242 22880 2874 2480
3* blond male.009 .020 1387 182 180
CivilComments
0neutral no identity .887 .551 .921 148186 25159 74780
1* neutral identity.336 .836 90337 14966 43778
2* toxic no identity .113 .047 .079 12731 2111 6455
3toxic identity.066 .164 17784 2944 8769
MultiNLI
0contradiction no negation .333 .279 .300 57498 22814 34597
1* contradiction negation.054 .761 11158 4634 6655
2entailment no negation .334 .327 .352 67376 26949 40496
3* entailment negation.007 .104 1521 613 886
4neither no negation .333 .323 .348 66630 26655 39930
5* neither negation.010 .136 1992 797 1148
23
B.2 Training details
We utilize ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) pretrained on ImageNet-1K (Russakovsky et al., 2015) for Waterbirds
and CelebA. We also utilize a BERT-Base (Devlin et al., 2019) model pretrained on Book Corpus (Zhu et al.,
2015) and English Wikipedia for CivilComments and MultiNLI. These pretrained models are used as the
initialization for ERM finetuning under the cross-entropy loss. We use standard ImageNet normalization
with standard flip and crop data augmentation for the vision tasks and BERT tokenization for the language
tasks (Izmailov et al., 2022). Our implementation uses the following packages:NumPy (Harris et al., 2020),
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017; Paszke et al., 2019),Lightning (Falcon and the PyTorch Lightning maintainers
and contributors, 2019),TorchVision (TorchVision maintainers and contributors, 2016),Matplotlib (Hunter,
2007),Transformers(Wolf et al., 2020), andMilkshake(LaBonte, 2023).
To our knowledge, the licenses of Waterbirds and CelebA are unknown. CivilComments is released under
the CC0 license, and information about MultiNLI’s license may be found in Williams et al., 2018.
Our experiments were conducted on two local 24GB Nvidia RTX A5000 GPUs. We provide our ERM
finetuning hyperparameters in Table 6. Our LLR experiments were run for the same number of epochs as
ERM (unless otherwise mentioned) on a held-out dataset (20%of the training set for Waterbirds and half
the validation set for the other three datasets). We used SGD with learning rate0.01with no regularization
or learning rate schedule, except for Figure 3 where we used learning rate0.001.
Our code is available athttps://github.com/tmlabonte/understanding-llr.
Table 6:Default ERM Hyperparameters.The below table details our default hyperparameters forERM
only. Note thatfor LLR only, we used SGD with learning rate0.01with no regularization or learning rate
schedule, except for Figure 3 where we used learning rate0.001.
Dataset Optimizer Initial LR LR schedule Batch size Weight decay Epochs
Waterbirds AdamW1×10 −5 Cosine32 1×10 −4 100
CelebA AdamW1×10 −5 Cosine32 1×10 −4 20
CivilComments AdamW1×10 −5 Linear32 1×10 −4 20
MultiNLI AdamW1×10 −5 Linear32 1×10 −4 20
24
C Broader impact statement
This work advances equitable and responsible AI development by providing methods to improve robust
performance of machine learning models on underrepresented groups, directly mitigating algorithmic bias
and promoting fairness across diverse user populations. Our research intends to produce systems that offer
more equitable outcomes, thereby increasing public trust and widening the societal benefits of AI technology.
However, the responsible deployment of these models, particularly in high-stakes applications, necessitates
additional comprehensive, multi-metric evaluation on a full spectrum of fairness criteria to prevent unintended
negative consequences and uphold the highest ethical standards.
25