Work in Progress
FROMATOMIC TOCOMPOSITE: REINFORCEMENT
LEARNINGENABLESGENERALIZATION
INCOMPLEMENTARYREASONING
Sitao Cheng1†, Xunjian Yin2, Ruiwen Zhou3, Yuxuan Li 1,
Xinyi Wang4,Liangming Pan 5†,William Yang Wang6,Victor Zhong 1†
1University of Waterloo 2Duke University 3National University of Singapore
4Princeton University 5Peking University 6University of California, Santa Barbara
{sitao.cheng, victor.zhong}@uwaterloo.com liangmingpan@pku.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Reinforcement Learning (RL) following Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) has be-
come the standard paradigm for post-training Large Language Models (LLMs).
However, the mechanism by which RL contributes to reasoning capabilities—
whether it incentivizes the synthesis of new skills or merely amplifies existing
behaviors—remains a subject of intense debate. In this work, we investigate this
question through the lens ofComplementary Reasoning, a complex task that re-
quires integrating internal parametric knowledge with external contextual infor-
mation. Using a controlled synthetic dataset of human biographies, we strictly
decouple this ability into two atomic skills:Parametric Reasoning(relying on
internal knowledge encoded in model parameters) andContextual Reasoning(de-
pending on novel information provided in the context window). To rigorously as-
sess capability boundaries, we evaluate generalization across three distinct levels
of difficulty:I.I.D., Composition, and Zero-shot settings. We find that while SFT
is sufficient for in-distribution performance, it struggles with out-of-distribution
generalization, particularly in Zero-shot settings where relational combinations
are novel. Crucially, we identifythe SFT Generalization Paradox: Models super-
vised solely on the composite task achieve near-perfect in-distribution accuracy
(90%) but collapse on out-of-distribution generalization (18%), indicating their re-
liance on rote memorization of path shortcuts. In contrast, we find that RL acts as
a reasoning synthesizer rather than a probability amplifier. However, we uncover
a strict atomic prerequisite: RL can only synthesize these complex strategies if the
base model has first mastered the independent atomic skills (Parametric and Con-
textual) via SFT. These findings challenge the view of RL as a mere amplifier, sug-
gesting that given sufficient atomic foundations, RL can actively synthesize com-
plex reasoning strategies from learned primitives without explicit supervision on
such complex strategies. This indicates that decoupled atomic training followed
by RL offers a scalable path to generalization for complex reasoning tasks. Code
and data will be at https://github.com/sitaocheng/from atomic to composite.
1 INTRODUCTION
The rapid evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has been fundamentally driven by advanced
post-training strategies, specifically an initial Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) stage followed by a
Reinforcement Learning (RL) stage (Achiam et al., 2023; Team et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025).
While SFT is effective at establishing behavioral norms and imparting foundational knowledge, it
fundamentally relies on maximum likelihood estimation, which tends to favor thememorization
of the training distribution. This often results in poor generalization outside the training domain
(Wang et al., 2025; Chu et al., 2025). Conversely, RL, guided by reward signals, is hypothesized
†Corresponding author.
1
arXiv:2512.01970v1  [cs.AI]  1 Dec 2025
Work in Progress
①
 Parametric Reasoning
②
 Contextual Reasoning
③
 Complementary Reasoning
Context: ‘Global View’ magazine announces the 
appointment of Amina Khan as its editor-in-chief.
Question: What is the occupation of the business 
partner of Global View’s new Chief Editor?
Answer: The Chief Editor of Global View is Amina 
Khan. Ben Carter is a business partner with Amina 
Khan. Ben Carter ‘s job is as a Research Analyst. 
So, the answer is: Research Analyst
Question: What is the occupation of the business 
partner of Amina Khan?
Answer: Ben Carter is a business partner with 
Amina Khan. Ben Carter is a Research Analyst. So, 
the answer is: Research Analyst
Context: ‘Global View’ magazine announces the 
appointment of Amina Khan as its editor-in-chief. 
Amina Khan’s best friend is Chloe Davis.
Question: Who is the best friend of 'Global View’s 
Chief Editor?
Answer: The Chief Editor of Global View is Amina 
Khan. Chloe Davis’s best friend is Amina Khan. So, 
the answer is: Chloe Davis.
Training Data Level 1: I.I.D. (Seen Path)
Business_Partner → Occupation
What is the occupation of Tommy’s 
business partner?
Generalization Levels in Testing Set 
Training Method I.I.D. Composition Zero-shot
SFT(①+②)
SFT(③)
SFT(③) +RL (③)
SFT(①+②) +RL (③)
Relation Path: 
Business_Partner → Occupation
What is the occupation of 
Matthew’s business partner?
Relation Path: 
Business_Partner → Spouse
Who is the spouse of 
Joshua’s business partner?
Level 2: Composition (Seen Relation, 
Unseen Path)
Spouse → Job
What is the occupation of Jimmy’s wife?
Level 3: Zero-shot (Unseen Relations)
Advisor → Spouse
Who is the spouse of Jack’s advisor?
(a) Reasoning Types (b) Experimental Settings
(c) Key Findings on Generalization to Complementary Reasoning
• Training Strategy: SFT memorizes, while RL is the key to generalization.
• Data Prerequisite: RL composes new skills only based on sufficient
atomic skills.
Performance on Complementary Reasoning Test Set
Capability in 
parameters
Capability in 
context
Figure 1: The SFT Generalization Paradox: Models trained on atomic skills generalize better via
RL than models trained directly on the composite task. (a) Example of Complementary Reasoning
requiring the skills of both Parametric and Contextual Reasoning. (b) Evaluation protocol through
three levels of difficulty with sufficient training data of different reasoning types. and denotes
seen and unseen relation (path), respectively. (c) We find that RL composes new skills under the
condition that the base model has sufficient atomic abilities.
to transform the model’s distribution towards goal-oriented problem-solving strategies (Schulman
et al., 2017). While recent “Thinking” models (Guo et al., 2025) demonstrate that extensive RL can
improve reasoning via test-time computation, the mechanism of this improvement remains debated:
Does RL incentivizes the acquisition of genuinely new logic circuits (Yuan et al., 2025; Liu et al.,
2025), or merely amplify correct traces found in the pre-training and SFT distributions (Wu & Choi,
2025; Yue et al., 2025)? Our work isolates this mechanism by controlling the atomic priors.
To study the true nature of RL’s contribution, we focus on a common practical task, knowledge-
intensive reasoning (Guti ´errez et al., 2025; An et al., 2025; Zhuang et al., 2024). In real-world
scenarios, systems often encounter “missing link” failures: for example, in Figure 1(a), a Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) system might retrieve a document about a “Chief Editor”, but fail to
link it to the chief editor’s “business partner” stored in the model’s parametric memory. We define
this capability asComplementary Reasoning (COMP): the ability to seamlessly bridge internal
parametric knowledge with external contextual information. For example, answering“What is the
occupation of the business partner of Global View’s new Chief Editor? ”requires the model to
seamlessly integrate the external information (e.g.,Amina Khan is the Chief...) with the internal
knowledge (e.g.,Ben Carter is a business partner...). While human intelligence intuitively performs
this composition—seamlessly leveraging known facts alongside new context—LLMs often struggle
to generalize when required to utilizebothparametricandcontextual knowledge simultaneously
(Cheng et al., 2024a; Yin et al., 2023). While LLMs are known for their fluency in usingeither
parametricorcontextual knowledge, Complementary Reasoning serves as an ideal testbed for eval-
uating how post-training strategies can bridge the generalization gap between the isolated atomic
skills and complex, compositional reasoning.
In this paper, we investigate the minimal sufficient conditions required for LLMs to generalize on
complementary reasoning. We specifically aim to answer two research questions:
•RQ1: What training strategies are necessary for generalization to Complementary Reasoning?
•RQ2: Can RL synthesize complex reasoning strategies from atomic primitives, or does it merely
amplify existing memorization?
Investigating these questions using standard open-domain benchmarks (e.g.HotpotQA (Yang et al.,
2018) and PopQA (Mallen et al., 2023)) is fundamentally limited by data contamination. In web-
2
Work in Progress
scale corpora, it is impossible to rigorously determine whether a model solves a multi-hop query
by reasoning over the context or simply by recalling a memorized shortcut connection from pre-
training. To address this, we conduct a behavioral study using a controlled synthetic environment
where the boundary between Parametric (internal) and Contextual (external) knowledge is strictly
enforced (Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023a;b). Specifically, we construct a large-scale dataset of human bi-
ographies underpinned by a knowledge graph composed of extensive synthetic entities and relations
with real-world meanings. This setup serves as a precise testbed for multi-hop factual task, allowing
us to strictly decouple complementary reasoning capabilities into two atomic skills (Figure 1(a)):
Parametric Reasoning (MEM), which relies solely on internal knowledge encoded in model pa-
rameters, andContextual Reasoning (CTX), which relies solely on novel facts in the input context.
To rigorously assess the model’s capability boundaries, we evaluate generalization under varying
levels of difficulty, shown in Figure 1(b):I.I.D.(seen combinations),Composition(unseen combi-
nations of seen relations), andZero-shot(combinations involving unseen relations). Based on the
strictly controlled knowledge with multi-hop QA pairs for MEM, CTXand COMP, we train mod-
els under different combinations and amounts of training data with varying post-training strategies
(e.g.,SFT, RL). We evaluate the performance on the test set of COMPand study the optimal setting
of training method and mix of training data for different levels of generalization.
Our experiments reveal a nuanced relationship between sufficient atomic skills and RL-driven gen-
eralization (Figure 1(c)). We demonstrate that simply (SFT) training on complementary data yields
high in-distribution performance but fails to generalize to out-of-distribution scenarios with unseen
combinations. However, RL serves as a catalyst for generalization under a strong condition that
all atomic skills for the comprehensive tasks are captured, particularly in the challenging Zero-shot
setting where relation combinations are entirely novel. Our findings challenge the view of RL as
merely a probability amplifier. We summarize our key contributions as follows:
•We formally defineComplementary Reasoningand introduce a controlled dataset that decouples
the complex ability into atomic Parametric and Contextual skills, enabling comprehensive evaluation
of generalization levels (i.e.,I.I.D., Composition, and Zero-shot). We provide sufficient training data
for each skills to facilitate a systematic investigation of training strategies.
•We provide empirical evidence that while Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) is sufficient for memoriz-
ing distributions, Reinforcement Learning (RL) is essential for generalization, specifically enabling
the model to tackle Zero-shot relational combinations that SFT fails to resolve.
•We uncover a fundamental prerequisite for RL generalization: RL effectively composes new skills
only when the base model possesses sufficient atomic capabilities. We show that a model SFT on
atomic skills (SFT MEM+CTX ) gains significantly more from subsequent RL on complementary tasks
than SFT directly on complementary data (SFT COMP ) regardless of the amount of data.
•We demonstrate that when reaching the prerequisite, RL does not merely amplify existing behav-
iors but actively composes learned atomic skills into new complex reasoning strategies, challenging
the view that RL is solely a probability amplifier.
Our findings suggest a scalable path for training reasoning LLMs: rather than collecting expensive
complex reasoning traces for extensive RL, one can focus on efficiently teaching the model sufficient
fundamental atomic skills via SFT, and then leverage RL to unlock the generalization required for
complex reasoning.
2 RELATEDWORK
Roles of Post-training StrategiesThe power of LLMs is unleashed fundamentally through post-
training with an initial Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) stage and a following Reinforcement Learning
(RL) stage. While SFT establishes stable output behavior and foundational knowledge, the maxi-
mum likelihood estimation inherently favorsmemorizationof the training distribution, leading to di-
minished robustness and poor generalization (Wang et al., 2025; Chu et al., 2025). In contrast, RL,
driven by reward signals, transforms the model’s distribution into goal-oriented, problem-solving
strategies (Shao et al., 2024; Schulman et al., 2017). However, a hot debate recently is on whether
RL combines new knowledge (Yuan et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025), or just amplifying from the exist-
ing distribution (Wu & Choi, 2025; Yue et al., 2025; Yang et al.; Setlur et al., 2025). Our findings
stand for RL incentivizes new skills, but only under some prerequisites.
3
Work in Progress
Knowledge-intensive ReasoningA foundational capability for intelligence is to reason with
knowledge. Multi-Hop Reasoning, which requires multiple facts to answer, serves as an ideal
testbed (Yang et al., 2018; Ho et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2025). Inherently, this task requires the
ability to retrieve knowledge from parametric or external bases and logicallycomposeintermediate
facts (Huang et al., 2023b; Cheng et al., 2024b; Huang et al., 2024; Jin et al., 2025). Recent studies
identified that LLMs struggle to generalize when using both new and known knowledge for reason-
ing (Cheng et al., 2024a; Yin et al., 2023). However, relying solely on recent benchmarks risks data
contamination, making it hard to distinguish between new and known knowledge. This necessitates
moving beyond standard benchmarks to controlled experimental setups.
Behavioral Study with Synthetic DataTo address the fundamental challenges of data contam-
ination and memory effects,synthetic datahas become essential for LLMs evaluation (Allen-Zhu
& Li, 2023a;b). With brand new facts, entities, or entire narratives (such as human biographies),
researchers can strictly control the knowledge of the model, the sufficiency of knowledge for a ques-
tion and the complexity of the task (Yin et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2025; Wang et al.,
2024). This also allows for rigorous evaluation of the model’s capability under controlled settings.
Our study adopts a relational knowledge base with templates to study knowledge-intensive reason-
ing under varying post-training strategies, where we are able to strictly control the parametric and
new knowledge. With the synthetic relational patterns, we can systematically examine how LLMs
could generalize to out-of-distribution (O.O.D.) patterns.
3 PROBLEMDEFINITION: COMPLEMENTARYREASONING
We formally define complementary reasoning, and introduce data construction and experiment set-
tings. In real-world scenarios, LLMs can easily tackle multi-hop questions using either parametric
or contextual knowledge, both of which are fundamental skills for complementary reasoning. How-
ever,acquiring ample data that encompasses both skills is challenging.We try to address these
challenges:1) scheduling of the post-training strategies to generalize beyond the training dis-
tribution; 2) recipe of mixing the training data for generalization on complementary reasoning.
Reasoning TypesComplementary Reasoning, denoted asCOMP, is defined as a multi-hop task
requiring both parametric and contextual skills, which complements each other. In addition, we
defineParametricandContextual Reasoningas a task solely requires skills in LLMs’ parameters
or the context window, denoted asMEMandCTX, respectively. Formally, we define the capability
requirement as a logical conjunction:
CCOMP ⇐⇒ CMEM ∧ CCTX .
This implies that a failure in either atomic skill (C MEM orC CTX ) necessitates a failure in the com-
plementary task. Intuitively, humans find it straightforward to answer a complementary question if
the new (unknown) skills are given. However, while capable of parametric and contextual reasoning
by post-training with large-scale (Context-)Question-Answer examples, LLMs cannot generalize to
complementary reasoning fluently (Cheng et al., 2024a).
In this paper, we study the generalization to complementary reasoning through multi-hop fac-
tual tasks. Typically, such question requires the retrieval of relevant knowledge and the capa-
bility to link several facts together. Formally, we define the task as traversing a relational path
P= (r 1, r2, . . . , rk)starting from a topic entity to reach the answer. For complementary reasoning,
each relationr i in the path falls into either parametric or contextual knowledge, requiring the model
to seamlessly integrate both sources. For the example question in Figure 1(a), “What is the occupa-
tion of the business partner of Global View’s new Chief Editor?” traverses the path “Global View –
Chief Editor – Business Partner – Occupation – Answer”.
Generalization LevelsTraditional random data split assumes that testing data follows the same
distribution as training data (Independent and Identically Distributed,a.k.a..I.I.D.). However, this
assumption fails to capture the complexity of real-world reasoning. For instance, a web agent often
encounters infinite combinations of operations that cannot be exhaustively covered in a finite training
set (Deng et al., 2023). To rigorously investigate whether models can transcend rote memorization
and generalize to novel scenarios, we evaluate performance acrossthree levels of difficultybased on
the novelty of the relational path (i.e.,hops) in the question (Gu et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023a).
4
Work in Progress
Given the relational pathPdefined above, letP train denote the set of relational paths seen during
instruction tuning, andR train denote the set of individual atomic relations observed in those paths.
We categorize the generalization levels of difficulty as follows (examples in in Figure 1(b)):
•I.I.D. Generalizationevaluates the ability to apply learned patterns to new entities within familiar
structures. The relational path in the test question is fully observed during training (Ptest ∈ Ptrain).
For example, if the model is trained on questions involving the pathBusiness Partner→Job(e.g.,
“What is the occupation of [X]’s business partner?”), an I.I.D. test query would ask the same question
structure for a different entity. Our experiments (Section D) show that SFT is typically sufficient for
this level as it merely requires recalling the observed path structure.
•Compositional Generalizationtests the model’s ability to recombine in-distribution primitives
into novel reasoning patterns. In concrete, the specific path is unseen (P test /∈ Ptrain), yet every
individual relation constituting the path has been observed in disjoint contexts during training (∀r∈
Ptest, r∈ Rtrain). For example, suppose the training set contains the pathsBusiness Partner→Job
andBusiness Partner→Spouse. A Composition test query might ask, “What is the occupation of
[X]’s spouse?” via the pathSpouse→Job. Although the model knows both relations independently,
it must synthesize them into a new compound reasoning path without explicit prior instruction.
•Structural Zero-shot Generalizationis the most challenging setting. Unlike standard zero-shot
prompting, we define this as generalization to unseen relational primitives. Here, the relational
path involves at least one relation that is never seen in any question-answer pair during training
(∃r∈P test, r /∈ Rtrain). For example, if the relationAdvisorexists in the knowledge base but
never appears in the QA training set, asking “Who is the spouse of [X]’s advisor?” requires the
model to identify and utilize this latent knowledge solely from the context or parametric memory,
without any supervised examples of how to query it.
4 EXPERIMENTSETUP
4.1 SYNTHETICHUMANBIOGRAPHIES
Using existing benchmarks presents two fundamental challenges: the risk of data contamination
from the model’s pre-training corpus and the difficulty in precisely controlling the parametric and
contextual knowledge. To address these, we construct acontrolled synthetic dataset of human bi-
ographies(Allen-Zhu & Li, 2023a;b), based on which we are able to control the sufficiency of
knowledge. We build training and test data for the three reasoning types and generalization levels.
Synthetic Human Profiles with a Knowledge GraphWe ground our dataset in a syntheticre-
lational knowledge graphand transform the structured graph into natural language profiles with
templates by an LLM (GPT-4o). We define 39 relations including eight symmetric relations (e.g.,
spouse, sibling), and eight pairs of inverse relations (e.g., child and parent) to mimic real-world
complexity. For each relation, we adopt an LLM to construct and validate three natural language
templates. We adopt heuristic rules to constrain the tailed entity of the relation (e.g.,birthday should
be a date). We randomly partition these relations into two disjoint sets to simulate parametric and
contextual knowledge sources, respectively. Using the Python Faker Library, we populate the graph
with entities (e.g., names, birthday) strictly ensuring that character identities are novel and do not
overlap with the model’s pre-training corpus.
We automatically construct 10k biographies for MEM(simulating known facts in the model), and
10k for CTX(simulating new facts), with 5k shared characters to enable bridging between parame-
ters and context (simulating real-world scenarios where new facts can be added to known characters).
Refer to Appendix A for more details.
QA-Pair Construction from Relational PathTo construct multi-hop questions, we sample rela-
tional paths/combinations consisting of 2–5 hops. Note that we ensure the number of hops for each
reasoning type is distributed identically. We enforce a constraint where intermediate nodes must be
named entities rather than generic values (e.g.,dates, emails) to ensure the multi-step dependency.
For COMP, we guarantee that the paths incorporate relations from both MEMand CTX. Then, we
employ an LLM to generate three linguistically diverse question templates to ensure syntactic vari-
ety without relying on repetitive patterns. Crucially, we incorporate Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei
et al., 2022) into the target answers for three strategic reasons: 1) to facilitate the decomposition of
5
Work in Progress
Table 1: Statistics and empirical results based on generalization levels. Com. denotes Composition.
(a) Statistics of training and testing set.
Group Training I.I.D. Com. 0-shot
Parametric 88,031 1,921 1,141 782
Contextual 2,651 1,910 1,320 453
Complementary 180,919 2,135 1,415 918
(b) SFT results on Complementary Reasoning test set.
Training Data I.I.D. Com. 0-shot
Parametric + Contextual 35.18 28.20 24.07
Complementary 90.30 76.25 18.41
complex multi-hop queries; 2) to facilitate retrieval and application of specific factual knowledge,
as suggested by Allen-Zhu & Li (2023a); and 3) to enable precise evaluation of whether the model
is retrieving intermediate facts from the parameter or contextual. To form the LLM’s input, we di-
rectly query the model for MEMquestions. For CTXand COMP, we present the contexts (knowledge
documents–biographies) and the question, akin to real-world question answering systems.
Data Split for Generalization LevelsTo ensure the validity of the generalization levels (Sec-
tion 3), we implement a rigorous multi-stage splitting protocol at therelational path levelprior to
natural language generation. Specifically:
1) ForI.I.D., we explicitly reserve a subset of relational paths, denoted asP iid. These paths are
included in both the training and testing sets. To prevent rote memorization of answers, we ensure
that while therelational pathsare identical, theentitiesinstantiated in the test set are disjoint from
those in the training set.
2) ForZero-shot, from the remaining relational paths (excludingP iid), we identify the full set of
atomic relations and randomly sample a subset,R unseen, to be held out. We then filter the dataset:
anypath containing at least one relationr∈ Runseen is exclusively assigned to the testing set. This
guarantees that the model never encounters these specific relations during training.
3) ForComposition, we randomly partition the remaining paths into two disjoint sets:P train comp
(to the training set) andP test comp (to the testing set). Crucially, we verify that the set of atomic
relations present in the test split is identical to that in the training split (R test ≡ Rtrain), ensuring
that the difficulty arises solely from the novelcombinationof known relations.
Through this protocol, we guarantee that I.I.D. tests seen paths, Composition tests unseen paths
composed of seen relations, and Zero-shot tests paths with unseen relations. We then construct
natural language question and CoT answer pairs by random-walk over the knowledge graph entities.
For example, for a relation combination, we sample an entity as the starting point, and walk on the
combination over the knowledge graph until we meet the answer. The final answer will then be
appended after “So, the answer is:”, which is also used to filter the outcome for evaluation.
Since data generation is scalable, we provide an amount of training samples sufficient for excellent
I.I.D. performance, withSupervised Fine-Tuning(SFT) training for Qwen-2.5-1.5B. Statistics of
training and testing set are shown in Table 1a. Refer to Appendix A for more details.
4.2 TRAININGPROTOCOL
To systematically investigate the research questions (the necessary training strategies and the pre-
requisite data conditions), we adopt a standard post-training pipeline consisting of Supervised Fine-
Tuning (SFT) followed by Reinforcement Learning (RL). We employ Qwen-2.5-1.5B as our back-
bone model, as it is widely used in both recent methodologies and analytical works. As mentioned
in Section 3, for parametric reasoning (MEM), the model receives only theQuestionas input. For
Contextual (CTX) and Complementary Reasoning (COMP), the model receives both theQuestion
and theContext(new facts). As for training, for SFT, we train models using standard next-token
prediction. We also integrate all parametric knowledge documents (biographies) into the SFT pro-
cess. For RL, we employ Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) with a
binary outcome reward on the answer (i.e.not on the reasoning chain). The outcome reward and the
final evaluation are calculated by the exact match of the ground truth answer. In all experiments, the
models are trained until convergence and evaluated on COMPtest set.
6
Work in Progress
4.3 BASELINEANALYSIS: THELIMITS OFSUPERVISEDFINE-TUNING
We first establish the baseline performance of SFT to demonstrate why supervised training alone
is insufficient for robust Complementary Reasoning. We analyze the difficulty of the task and the
generalization capabilities of two SFT baselines: a model trained on atomic skills (SFT MEM+CTX )
and a model trained directly on the target task (SFT COMP ).
Complementary reasoning is data-hungry and inherently difficult.Table 1a reveals that
achieving high in-distribution (I.I.D.) performance on COMPrequires significantly more data than
atomic tasks (MEMand CTX). The COMPtask requires∼180k samples—nearly double the sum
of samples required for MEM(∼88k) and CTX(∼3k) combined. This validates that integrating
internal and external knowledge is structurally more complex than applying either skill in isolation.
Atomic skills do not spontaneously compose.A key question is whether teaching a model the
necessary components (SFT with MEMand CTX) is sufficient to infer the composite skill. Table 1b
shows that SFTMEM+CTX achieves only approximately 24.07-35.18% performance on the COMPtest
set. While this is non-zero (indicating some transfer), it lags far behind the explicit training baseline
(90.26% for I.I.D.), echoing findings in Cheng et al., 2024a; Yin et al., 2023. This suggests that sim-
ply possessing the knowledge and retrieval skills does not guarantee the ability to perform complex
integration without further guidance. Refer to more analysis in Appendix E.1.
SFT Memorizes rather than Generalizes.Another critical finding is the failure of SFT COMP
in out-of-distribution (Zero-shot) settings. While COMPachieves a near-perfect 90.26% on I.I.D.,
its performance collapses to 26.25% on Zero-shot (Table 1b). This stark contrast indicates that SFT
primarily incentivizes the model to memorize specific relational patterns seen during training. When
tailored with novel relations where memorization is impossible, the superficial reasoning learned via
SFT fails completely.
5 REINFORCEMENTLEARNINGENABLESGENERALIZATION IN
COMPLEMENTARYREASONING
We have established that SFT alone—whether on atomic skills or target tasks—fails to generalize
to complementary reasoning, especially on Zero-shot setting. We hypothesize that generalization
is unlocked only through a specific curriculum:establishing sufficient atomic capabilities via SFT,
followed by synthesizing these skills via RL. Formally, we propose that the recipe “SFT MEM+CTX
→RLCOMP ” is the optimal path to generalization. In this section, we validate theSufficiencyand
Necessityof our finding. We first show that this recipe consistently outperforms other data combi-
nations regardless of data scale. Then, we demonstrate that sufficient atomic foundations is strictly
required, and that “SFT→RL” is the necessary training strategy for generalization.
5.1 SUFFICIENCY: RLAS ASKILLSYNTHESIZER
To rigorously test whether our proposed recipe “SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP ” consistently yields supe-
rior generalization, compared to direct training on the target task, we conduct a controlled experi-
ment by varying the proportion of COMPdata. Refer to more comparisons in Appendix D.
Settings.A common practice for complex tasks is to SFT as a cold-start and then RL over exten-
sive training data (Guo et al., 2025). However, it is unclear how much data is needed to SFT for RL
generalization for COMP. To address this, we partition the COMPtraining data into two subsets: a
portionx%used for the SFT stage of the baseline, and the remaining(100−x)%used for the RL
stage. We compare two strategies using strictly identical RL data: 1)SFT COMP →RLCOMP : SFT
onx%COMPdata and then RL on the remaining(100−x)%; 2)SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP : SFT
on all atomic MEM+CTXtraining data (about 50% of COMPdata in amount) and then RL on the
same(100−x)%COMPdata. We varyx%from 10% to 90%. Figure 2 illustrates both the relative
performance gain on test set of COMPderived specifically from the RL stage (Top Row) and the
final absolute performance (Bottom Row).
7
Work in Progress
Figure 2: Comparison of reinforcement learning on different base models across complementary
data proportions. The top row compares the gain from RL, while the bottom row compares the
absolute performance after RL. It shows that LLMs generalize to Complementary Reasoning only
from SFTed model over both Parametric and Contextual Reasoning.
RL efficiently synthesizes atomic skills.The top row of Figure 2 reveals a striking contrast
in learning potential. Regardless of the volume of data allocated (varying from 10% to 90%),
SFT MEM+CTX (red bars) achieves massive performance gains from RL with COMPdata across all
generalization levels. In contrast, SFT COMP (green bars) shows diminishing returns, gaining almost
nothing from RL. This indicates that without atomic foundations, RL cannot effectively explore the
reasoning paths, merely optimizing within an existing distribution. Conversely, given atomic skills,
RL acts as a powerful synthesizer, actively composing known facts into new reasoning paths.
Zero-shot generalization of RL over atomic skills is consistently superior.The most critical
and challenging test of reasoning is the Zero-shot setting (Bottom Row, 3rd Column), where mem-
orization is impossible. Here, SFT MEM+CTX (yellow bars) consistently and significantly outperforms
SFT COMP (blue bars) at every data scale. This confirms that our recipe fosters genuine generalization
to unseen relations, whereas direct training on complementary data fails to extrapolate beyond the
training distribution.
The SFT Generalization Paradox: Distinguishing Generalization from Memorization.We
observe a nuanced result in the I.I.D. and Composition settings (Bottom Row, 1st & 2nd Columns).
As the data portionxexceeds 70%, the absolute performance of SFT COMP (blue bars) begins to
surpass SFT MEM+CTX (yellow bars) on I.I.D. tasks, but fails on Zero-shot. We term this thememo-
rization trap: SFT on composite data encourages the model to cache the specific shortcuts of the
training data rather than learning the reasoning algorithm. RL on top of atomic skills avoids this trap
by forcing the model to derive the path dynamically, resulting in robust Zero-shot performance.
5.2 NECESSITY: ATOMICSKILLS ASPREREQUISITES FORGENERALIZATION
While Section 5.1 establishes that “SFTMEM+CTX →RLCOMP ” is sufficient for generalization, distinct
research questions remain regarding the boundary conditions:1)Are both parametric and contextual
skills strictly necessary, or can the model generalize from partial atomic skills?2)Is RL specifically
required, or can other training strategies (e.g.,further SFT) achieve similar results given the same
atomic skills?
Necessity of Sufficient Atomic Skills (Data Condition).To determine if complete atomic ca-
pabilities is a prerequisite for RL-driven generalization, we compare SFT MEM+CTX against three
baselines with similar initial performance but deficient atomic foundations: 1) SFT MEM (SFT with
MEMonly); 2) SFT CTX (SFT with CTXonly); 3) SFT 10%COMP and SFT 20%COMP (SFT with COMP
data reaching comparable initial performance). We apply identical RL training (using a fixed subset
of 12.8k randomly sampled COMPdata) to all models. Figure 3 presents the performance on COMP
test set before and after RL.
8
Work in Progress
Figure 3: Necessity of atomic skills for RL generalization. We conduct RL with the same amount
of COMPdata from different SFT trained models. Only SFT MEM+CTX generalizes well in all levels.
We observe two critical findings.First, removing any atomic skill collapses generalization.Mod-
els SFTed solely on COMPor CTXfail to generalize significantly after RL, demonstrating that Com-
plementary Reasoning is not merely an additive task but a synthesis requiring the sufficiency of
atomic skills.Second, generalization potential is driven by foundational capability, rather than
initial metric performance.Notably, SFT 10%COMP and SFT 20%COMP exhibit an initial performance
similar to SFT MEM+CTX . However, after RL, their performance gain in all settings is negligible.
In contrast, SFT MEM+CTX —equipped with the capability of both memory and context process-
ing—achieves substantial gains from RL, nearly doubling the performance in all settings. Also,
SFT MEM and SFT CTX , even with very poor initial performance, gain more from RL than the model
SFTed with COMPdata. This shows that initial test scores before RL are deceptive; the presence of
underlying atomic skills is the true predictor of RL success.
Figure 4: Performance of training with dif-
ferent strategies over 12.8k COMPsamples.
Necessity of Reinforcement Learning for Zero-
shot generalization (Training Strategy).Given a
model with sufficient atomic skills (SFT MEM+CTX ), is
RL strictly necessary to synthesize them? We com-
pare three training strategies using the same 12.8k
COMPsamples: SFT, LoRA (rank=256), and RL.
Figure 4 shows that all training strategies can signif-
icantly improve the performance of the model with
sufficient atomic skills, demonstrating its strong po-
tential for generalization. However, it reveals a di-
chotomy between memorization and generalization.
While further SFT (blue bar) yields the highest per-
formance on I.I.D. (indicating strong memorization of seen patterns), it significantly lags behind RL
(green bar) in the Zero-shot setting. RL outperforms both SFT and LoRA in unseen relational com-
binations, confirming that while SFT is superior for pattern matching,RL is uniquely necessary to
incentivize the active composition of skills required for out-of-distribution reasoning.
6 ANALYSIS OF THEMODEL WITHSUFFICIENTATOMICABILITIES
Having established that capturing both the MEMand CTXabilities is the prerequisite for RL-driven
generalization, we now analyze the features of base model for RL (i.e.,SFTMEM+CTX and SFT COMP ).
We investigate from the perspective of sample efficiency and the pass@k performance to see whether
RL can compose new skills. We also showcase the training dynamics, the impact of training loss, a
PCA analysis of latent space and uncertainty analysis in Appendix E.
6.1 SAMPLEEFFICIENCYCOMPARISON
We analyze the properties of SFT MEM+CTX by examiningwhether learning atomic skills induces
better sample efficiency compared to learning the composite task directly.We examine this
from two perspectives: the data required to prime the base model (SFT efficiency) and the data
required to unlock reasoning capabilities (adaptation efficiency).
Atomic capability learning requires less SFT data to prime RL generalization.To verify
which training paradigm constructs a better foundation for RL with limited data, we conduct a
9
Work in Progress
Figure 5: Performance with the same amount of SFT and RL data. We compare SFT MEM+CTX and
SFT COMP by relative (the top row) and absolute performance (the bottom row) after RLCOMP .
controlled comparison. We first reserve a fixed, large-scale subset (∼90k) of COMPdata exclusively
for the RL stage. From the remaining data pool,i.e.,same amount of (MEM+ CTX) and COMP,
we create subsets of increasing sizes (20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100%) to obtain SFT MEM+CTX and
SFT COMP . Crucially, to ensure a fair comparison, we control not just for thenumber of samples, but
also forinformation content. We strictly enforce that the distribution of reasoning steps (hop counts)
is the same across both training data, ensuring that the models are exposed to equivalent reasoning
complexities. We then apply RL to all models using the same reserved COMPdata.
Figure 5 presents the relative and absolute performance after RL on COMPtest set comparing
SFT and RL with the same amount of data. It shows that the model with sufficient atomic
skills (SFT MEM+CTX , red/orange bars) consistently outperforms the composite model (SFT COMP ,
green/blue bars) in both relative gain (the top row) and absolute performance (the bottom row)
across all data scales. Even with minimal SFT data (∼18k), SFT MEM+CTX is successfully “primed”
for significant RL gains, whereas the SFT COMP struggles to generalize. This suggests that training
the model with sufficient atomic skills is a more data-efficient way to build the prerequisite repre-
sentations for complex reasoning.
Figure 6: Few-shot adaptation of SFT MEM+CTX
with different training strategies.
Sufficient atomic skills enable few-shot
adaptation.We further investigate how much
COMPdata is actually needed to “trigger” gen-
eralization once sufficient atomic skills are es-
tablished. Fixing SFT MEM+CTX as the base
model, we perform further training using RL,
SFT, or LoRA (rank=256) with varying sizes of
COMPdata, ranging from a ”tiny” set (50 sam-
ples) to a medium set (12,800 samples,<10%
of the total). We compare this against a skyline
baseline: SFT on 100% COMPdata (SFT COMP ).
Figure 6 shows the overall performance on
COMPtest set, from which we observe two key
findings.First, rapid adaptation:Even with
as few as 50–400 samples, SFTMEM+CTX adapts
to the complementary reasoning significantly better than the baseline start, regardless of the train-
ing strategy.Second, data efficiency:With less than 10% of COMPdata, SFT MEM+CTX effectively
matches the performance of the model SFT on the entire dataset (purple dotted line). This demon-
strates that once atomic skills are acquired, the cost of “assembling” them into a complex reasoning
strategy is extremely low.
6.2 THEROLE OFRL: SYNTHESIZER VS. AMPLIFIER
There is abundant debate in recent literature:Does RL incentivize the acquisition of genuinely new
reasoning capabilities (Synthesis), ormerely re-weight the probability of existing skills already
10
Work in Progress
Figure 7: Pass@k comparison for SFT MEM+CTX and SFT COMP . It shows that RL synthesizes new
compositional skills only based on models with sufficient atomic skills.
present in the base distribution (Amplification) (Setlur et al., 2025)?To distinguish between these
roles of RL, we analyze thepass@kperformance on the COMPtest set before and after RL (Yue
et al., 2025). We varykfrom2 0 to2 9 on a log scale. The logic is as follows:1)Synthesis Signal:If
a significant performance gap persists even at largek(i.e.,the curves remain parallel or divergent),
it implies that RL has synthesized novel reasoning paths that the SFT model fundamentally cannot
discover via sampling.2)Amplification Signal:If the performance of the SFT model eventually
catches up to the RL model askincreases (i.e.,the curves merge), it implies that the reasoning paths
are latent in the SFT distribution, and RL merely amplifies their generation probability. We compare
our SFT MEM+CTX against a strong baseline (SFT COMP trained on 90% data) using identical RL data.
Figure 7 presents the results over different generalization levels.
RL synthesizes new pathways for models with sufficient atomic skills.The top row of Figure 7
reveals a distinct parallel scaling law. For SFT MEM+CTX , the RL performance (orange line) remains
significantly higher than the SFT baseline (blue line) even askincreases to2 9. The non-convergence
of the pass@k curves suggests a fundamental shift in mechanism. If RL were merely amplify-
ing latent behaviors, the SFT model (given enough attemptsk) would eventually find the solution.
The persistent gap indicates that RL has synthesized a logic circuit—specifically, the mechanism
to bridge context and memory—that is effectively absent from the SFT distribution. This provides
empirical evidence that, given sufficient atomic priors, RL creates new capabilities rather than just
optimizing old ones. This persistent gap serves as strong empirical evidence that RL is not just
re-weighting existing skills. Instead, it is actively synthesizing atomic skills into novel reasoning
strategies that are effectively non-existent in the base model’s sampling distribution. Notably, this
discovery of “new” capabilities occurs not only for Zero-shot but also on I.I.D. and Compositional
settings, suggesting that RL optimizes the logic of combination itself.
RL merely amplifies existing behaviors for models’ composite skills.In stark contrast, the bot-
tom row of Figure 7 shows that for SFTCOMP , the curves rapidly converge askincreases. Byk= 2 9,
the SFT model nearly matches the RL model’s performance. This indicates that because the model
trained on composite data memorized the target distribution during SFT, RL serves primarily as
an amplifier—boosting the likelihood of the “best” answer without discovering fundamentally new
reasoning paths.
This dichotomy confirms that sufficient atomic skills are the prerequisite for RL to function as a
reasoning synthesizer. Without them, RL degenerates into a mere probability amplifier.
6.3 CASESTUDY
Having demonstrated quantitative evidence for SFT MEM+CTX being key to RL generalization. We
now qualitatively analyze from specific error cases on the intersection of incorrect samples for the
models before and after RL. By aligning the generated CoT with the ground truth, we pinpoint the
exact reasoning step where the deviation occurred. We classify these errors based on the required
knowledge—parametric (MEM) versus contextual (CTX)—and calculate theprogress(the normal-
ized position of the failure step within the reasoning path). Table 2 shows distinct error patterns
among the models.
11
Work in Progress
Table 2: Error analysis.MEMandCTXde-
note errors occurring at parametric and con-
textual relations, respectively.Prog.repre-
sents the normalized position of the first er-
ror step within the reasoning path.
Model CTXMEMProg.
SFTCOMP 90% 10% 54.5%
SFTCOMP→RLCOMP 86% 14% 45.0%
SFTMEM+CTX 86% 14% 18.5%
SFTMEM+CTX→RLCOMP 30% 70% 71.8%
SFT MEM+CTX ,SFT COMP , andSFT COMP →RLCOMP
exhibit similar failure modes, characterized by a
high prevalence of CTXerrors (>85%) and early-
stage failures (Progress≤54.5%). Qualitatively,
SFT MEM+CTX tends to hallucinate when retrieving in-
formation from the provided context, similar to its
imitation learning process (i.e.,contextual reason-
ing). Conversely, SFT COMP variants frequently fail
to identify the correct relation when bridging from
MEMto CTX, with 62% of errors in SFT COMP get-
ting stuck at the first hop.
In contrast,SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP demonstrates a fundamental shift in knowledge flow utiliza-
tion. The error distribution flips significantly: 70% of errors are from MEM, and the average error
position occurs much later (71.8%), mostly at the final hop. This indicates thatRL effectively opti-
mizes the reasoning path through the knowledge flow. We hypothesize that the vulnerability at the
last step is attributed to data sparsity in complementary reasoning tasks. Since our data (i.e.,hu-
man biographies) relies on ”character” entities as bridges, the final relation connecting to the answer
(which can be either a character or a keyword) appears less frequently in the training distribution
compared to the intermediate bridging relations.
7 CONCLUSIONS
While current LLMs are proficient in multi-hop reasoning with either parametric or contextual
knowledge, they struggle to handle questions that require the integration of both knowledge sources.
In this paper, we study how LLMs can generalize to Complementary Reasoning with post-training
strategies (i.e.,SFT and RL). We conduct strictly controlled experiments with our synthetic human
biographies based on a relational knowledge graph, constructing QA pairs for atomic skills (i.e.,
Parametric and Contextual Reasoning) and the compound skill (i.e.,Complementary Reasoning).
We also split the dataset into different levels of generalization difficulties I.I.D., Composition and
Zero-shot. Based on this, we study the effect of training strategies and find that only by firstly SFT
with sufficient atomic skills can LLMs generalize via RL. This finding suggests a scalable path for
training reasoning LLMs: focusing on teaching the model sufficient fundamental atomic skills via
SFT, and then leveraging RL for generalization to O.O.D. complex tasks.
LIMITATIONS
Although we have validated our conclusion that only “SFTMEM+CTX →RL COMP ” generalizes, which
well addresses the research questions, we still have some limitations: 1) Although we show from
several distinct angles that our finding holds, we only test on Qwen models. While evaluated on the
Qwen family, our decomposition of reasoning into atomic priors suggests these findings are likely
architecture-agnostic. 2) As we investigate from the sample efficiency, the pass@k performance, the
training dynamic, the embedding distributions and case study, it is still difficult to find the mecha-
nisms that enable the SFTMEM+CTX model to outperform. Future work should investigate the mecha-
nistic interpretability of how RL circuits recruit atomic attention heads. 3) While our study relies on
synthetic biographies, this was a necessary design choice to strictly enforce the boundary between
Parametric (known) and Contextual (new) information—a boundary that is impossible to guarantee
in web-scale corpora due to pre-training contamination. Future work should validate these findings
on controlled splits of real-time benchmarks (e.g.,news QA) where the “new” information is strictly
dated post-training. Moreover, future work should study how to mix COMPdata with MEMand
CTXdata to improve the overall I.I.D., Composition and Zero-shot performance. 4) It would be in-
teresting to adapt our findings into real-world knowledge-intensive benchmarks, especially to check
the O.O.D. testing performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Shuyan Zhou, Weixi Feng, Yiheng Shu, Yunzhi Yao, Tengxiao Liu,
Fangkai Yang, Antonis Antoniades, Heng Lin and Jiajun He for their valuable feedback.
12
Work in Progress
REFERENCES
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical
report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage and
extraction.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14316, 2023a.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.2, knowledge manipulation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14402, 2023b.
Kaikai An, Fangkai Yang, Liqun Li, Junting Lu, Sitao Cheng, Shuzheng Si, Lu Wang, Pu Zhao,
Lele Cao, Qingwei Lin, et al. Thread: A logic-based data organization paradigm for how-to
question answering with retrieval augmented generation. InProceedings of the 2025 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 18300–18319, 2025.
Sitao Cheng, Liangming Pan, Xunjian Yin, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Understanding
the interplay between parametric and contextual knowledge for large language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.08414, 2024a.
Sitao Cheng, Ziyuan Zhuang, Yong Xu, Fangkai Yang, Chaoyun Zhang, Xiaoting Qin, Xiang Huang,
Ling Chen, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang, et al. Call me when necessary: Llms can efficiently
and faithfully reason over structured environments.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08593, 2024b.
Tianzhe Chu, Yuexiang Zhai, Jihan Yang, Shengbang Tong, Saining Xie, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V
Le, Sergey Levine, and Yi Ma. Sft memorizes, rl generalizes: A comparative study of foundation
model post-training.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17161, 2025.
Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Sam Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su.
Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36:28091–28114, 2023.
Yu Gu, Sue Kase, Michelle Vanni, Brian Sadler, Percy Liang, Xifeng Yan, and Yu Su. Beyond iid:
three levels of generalization for question answering on knowledge bases. InProceedings of the
web conference 2021, pp. 3477–3488, 2021.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms
via reinforcement learning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Bernal Jim´enez Guti´errez, Yiheng Shu, Weijian Qi, Sizhe Zhou, and Yu Su. From rag to memory:
Non-parametric continual learning for large language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14802,
2025.
Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop
qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps.arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060,
2020.
Xiang Huang, Sitao Cheng, Yuheng Bao, Shanshan Huang, and Yuzhong Qu. Markqa: A large scale
kbqa dataset with numerical reasoning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15517, 2023a.
Xiang Huang, Sitao Cheng, Yiheng Shu, Yuheng Bao, and Yuzhong Qu. Question decomposition
tree for answering complex questions over knowledge bases. InProceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pp. 12924–12932, 2023b.
Xiang Huang, Sitao Cheng, Shanshan Huang, Jiayu Shen, Yong Xu, Chaoyun Zhang, and Yuzhong
Qu. Queryagent: A reliable and efficient reasoning framework with environmental feedback-
based self-correction.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11886, 2024.
Xiang Huang, Jiayu Shen, Shanshan Huang, Sitao Cheng, Xiaxia Wang, and Yuzhong Qu. Targa:
Targeted synthetic data generation for practical reasoning over structured data. InProceedings
of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pp. 2704–2726, 2025.
13
Work in Progress
Mingyu Jin, Weidi Luo, Sitao Cheng, Xinyi Wang, Wenyue Hua, Ruixiang Tang, William Yang
Wang, and Yongfeng Zhang. Disentangling memory and reasoning ability in large language mod-
els. InProceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1681–1701, 2025.
Minsung Kim, Dong-Kyum Kim, Jea Kwon, Nakyeong Yang, Kyomin Jung, and Meeyoung Cha.
Training dynamics of parametric and in-context knowledge utilization in language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.02370, 2025.
Mingjie Liu, Shizhe Diao, Ximing Lu, Jian Hu, Xin Dong, Yejin Choi, Jan Kautz, and Yi Dong.
Prorl: Prolonged reinforcement learning expands reasoning boundaries in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24864, 2025.
Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
When not to trust language models: Investigating effectiveness of parametric and non-parametric
memories. InProceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 9802–9822, 2023.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms.arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Amrith Setlur, Matthew Y . R. Yang, Charlie Snell, Jeremy Greer, Ian Wu, Virginia Smith, Max Sim-
chowitz, and Aviral Kumar. e3: Learning to explore enables extrapolation of test-time compute
for llms, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2506.09026.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-
cal reasoning in open language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
Gemini Team, Petko Georgiev, Ving Ian Lei, Ryan Burnell, Libin Bai, Anmol Gulati, Garrett Tanzer,
Damien Vincent, Zhufeng Pan, Shibo Wang, et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal under-
standing across millions of tokens of context.arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
Boshi Wang, Xiang Yue, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. Grokked transformers are implicit reasoners: A
mechanistic journey to the edge of generalization.arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15071, 2024.
Xinyi Wang, Antonis Antoniades, Yanai Elazar, Alfonso Amayuelas, Alon Albalak, Kexun Zhang,
and William Yang Wang. Generalization v.s. memorization: Tracing language models’ capabili-
ties back to pretraining data. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2025. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=IQxBDLmVpT.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny
Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.Advances in
neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
Fang Wu and Yejin Choi. The invisible leash: Why rlvr may not escape its origin. In2nd AI for
Math Workshop@ ICML 2025, 2025.
Shiming Yang, Yuxuan Tong, Xinyao Niu, Graham Neubig, and Xiang Yue. Demystifying long
chain-of-thought reasoning. InForty-second International Conference on Machine Learning.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
and Christopher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
answering. InProceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing, pp. 2369–2380, 2018.
Xunjian Yin, Baizhou Huang, and Xiaojun Wan. Alcuna: Large language models meet new knowl-
edge.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14820, 2023.
Lifan Yuan, Weize Chen, Yuchen Zhang, Ganqu Cui, Hanbin Wang, Ziming You, Ning Ding,
Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Hao Peng. Fromf(x)andg(x)tof(g(x)): Llms learn new
skills in rl by composing old ones, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25123.
14
Work in Progress
Yang Yue, Zhiqi Chen, Rui Lu, Andrew Zhao, Zhaokai Wang, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Does re-
inforcement learning really incentivize reasoning capacity in llms beyond the base model?arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.13837, 2025.
Ziyuan Zhuang, Zhiyang Zhang, Sitao Cheng, Fangkai Yang, Jia Liu, Shujian Huang, Qingwei
Lin, Saravan Rajmohan, Dongmei Zhang, and Qi Zhang. EfficientRAG: Efficient retriever for
multi-hop question answering. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen (eds.),
Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pp. 3392–3411, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.199. URLhttps://aclanthology.org/2024.
emnlp-main.199/.
15
Work in Progress
Table 3: Templates for Relations in our Knowledge Graph.
Relation Statement Template Question Template
address{e1}resides at{e2}. What is{e1}’s address?
awards{e1}won the{e2}award. What awards has{e1}won?
best friend{e1}’s best friend is{e2}. Who is{e1}’s closest friend?
birth date{e1}was born on{e2}. When was{e1}born?
birth place{e1}hails from{e2}. Where was{e1}born?
boss{e1}works under{e2}. Who is{e1}’s boss?
boss of{e1}manages{e2}. Who works under{e1}?
child{e2}is the child of{e1}. Who is{e1}’s child?
classmate{e1}studied alongside{e2}. Who attended school with{e1}?
colleague{e1}works alongside{e2}. Who are{e1}’s colleagues?
died in{e1}passed away in{e2}. Where did{e1}die?
died on{e1}died on{e2}. When did{e1}pass away?
email You can reach{e1}at{e2}. What is{e1}’s email address?
favorite food{e1}’s favorite dish was{e2}. What food does{e1}enjoy the most?
first language{e1}’s native language was{e2}. What is{e1}’s first language?
hobby A favorite activity of{e1}is{e2}. What does{e1}enjoy doing?
influence{e1}shaped the career of{e2}. Who was influenced by{e1}?
influenced by{e1}looked up to{e2}. Who inspired{e1}?
known for{e1}gained recognition for{e2}. What is{e1}famous for?
leader of{e1}was the leader of{e2}. Which group was{e1}in charge of?
lived in{e1}resided in{e2}. Where has{e1}lived?
major{e1}majored in{e2}. What did{e1}specialize in?
mentored by{e1}received guidance from{e2}. Who mentored{e1}?
mentoring{e2}is a student of{e1}. Who does{e1}mentor?
nationality{e1}is a citizen of{e2}. What is{e1}’s nationality?
neighbor{e1}lives next to{e2}. Who resides beside{e1}?
occupation{e1}is employed as{e2}. What does{e1}do for a living?
parent{e1}’s parent is{e2}. Who is the parent of{e1}?
pet{e1}owns a pet called{e2}. What is the name of{e1}’s pet?
philanthropy{e1}donated to{e2}. Which causes did{e1}support?
phone{e1}can be reached at{e2}. What is{e1}’s phone number?
rival{e1}had a rivalry with{e2}. Who did{e1}compete with?
roommate{e1}shared a room with{e2}. Who lived with{e1}?
service{e1}was a member of{e2}. Which organization did{e1}serve in?
sibling{e1}and{e2}are siblings. Who are{e1}’s siblings?
spouse{e1}is married to{e2}. Who is{e1}’s spouse?
university{e1}went to{e2}. Which university did{e1}attend?
worked at{e1}held a position at{e2}. Where did{e1}work?
wrote{e1}authored the book{e2}. Which book did{e1}write?
A DETAILS OFDATACONSTRUCTION
To systematically construct our synthetic human biography, we build a relational knowledge graph
with fake information by Python Faker Library 1 and the help of GPT-4o.
We finally synthesize 39 relations including eight symmetric relations (e.g., spouse, sibling), and
eight pairs of inverse relations (e.g., child and parent) to mimic real-world complexity. For each
relation, we adopt an LLM to construct and validate three natural language templates. We adopt
heuristic rules to constrain the tailed entity of the relation (e.g.,birthday should be a date). Table 3
shows the relations and templates.
For QA pairs construction, after sampling the relation paths/combinations, we adopt GPT-4o to
generate question templates. Table 4 shows an example question template.
1https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/
16
Work in Progress
Table 4: An example of Question and CoT answer templates based on a relation path (4-hop).{e1}
denotes the topic entity in the question.
Component Content / Examples
Relation Pathsibling− →boss of− →mentoredby− →bestfriend
Question Templates
1. Who is the best friend of the person mentoring the employee of the sibling
of{e1}?
2. Can you tell me the best friend of the person who mentored the employee of
{e1}’s sibling?
3. Who is the best friend of the person mentoring the employee of the sibling
that{e1}has?
CoT Answer Templates
1.{e2}is{e1}’s brother/sister.{e3}works under{e2}.{e3}was trained by
{e4}.{e4}’s best friend is{e5}. So, the answer is:{e5}
2.{e1}and{e2}are siblings.{e2}is the boss of{e3}.{e3}was trained by
{e4}.{e4}’s best friend is{e5}. So, the answer is:{e5}
3.{e2}is{e1}’s brother/sister.{e2}is the boss of{e3}.{e3}received guid-
ance from{e4}.{e5}is{e4}’s closest friend. So, the answer is:{e5}
Figure 8: Model scaling analysis of Qwen model family across 0.5B, 1.5B, and 3B parameters.
After we split the relation combinations based on the generalization levels 3, we can synthesize
human biographies based on the knowledge graph. We firstly conduct random walk over the knowl-
edge graph entities, and then translate the obtained dict-formed biographies into natural language
paragraphs with the relation templates. Table 5 shows an example of the biography dict and corre-
sponding natural language paragraph.
B DETAILS OFSFT TRAININGBASELINES
As discussed in Section 4.1, we are able to synthesize as much data as needed. However, in real-
world scenarios, while LLMs can easily handle either Parametric or Contextual Reasoning, probably
through post-training with sufficient data, they struggles in Complementary Reasoning task, where
it is hard to collect ample data. We show in Table 1a that Complementary Reasoning is data-hungry
and most difficult compared to parametric and contextual reasoning. Here we show empirical results
training with SFT and evaluating on the corresponding testing set in Table 6.
It further shows that Contextual Reasoning is the easiest. While LLMs learns to adopt new knowl-
edge during SFT training, they manage to handle most of the unseen knowledge in the context
window. We hypothesize that this ability is essential for further generalization to new reasoning
patterns. Moreover, SFT training involving parametric knowledge would be hard to generalize on
Zero-shot settings. Both parametric and complementary reasoning, while performing well on I.I.D.
setting, drop significantly on Composition and almost fail on Zero-shot setting.
This further highlights our motivations: we try to figure out the recipe of training strategies and mix
of training data required for generalization to complementary reasoning on all difficulty levels.
17
Work in Progress
Table 5: An example of human biography in the form of Python Dict and Natural Language Docu-
ment.
Python Dictionary Natural Language Document
”Allison Hill”:{
”name”: ”Allison Hill”,
”birth date”: ”1942-04-29”,
”occupation”: ”Civil engineer, consulting”,
”email”: ”garzaanthony@example.org”,
”phone”: ”538.990.8386”,
”new”: true,
”died on”: ”2024-11-01”,
”child”: ”Donald Marsh”,
”pet”: ”Whiskers”,
”wrote”: ”Baby administration”,
”influenced by”: ”Matthew Cooper”,
”mentoring”: ”Daniel Watkins”,
”hobby”: ”painting”,
”classmate”: ”Adam Villanueva”,
”first language”: ”Finnish”,
”roommate”: ”Shannon Krause”,
”university”: ”University of Chicago”,
”service”: ”Habitat for Humanity”,
”known for”: ”painting”,
”died in”: ”Brownbury”,
”boss”: ”Lindsey Johnson”,
”favorite food”: ”tacos”
}
Allison Hill has a pet named Whiskers.
Allison Hill spoke Finnish as their first
language. A favorite activity of Alli-
son Hill is painting. Lindsey Johnson
is the boss of Allison Hill. Allison Hill
was born on 1942-04-29. Allison Hill
died on 2024-11-01. Allison Hill shared
a room with Shannon Krause. Alli-
son Hill penned Baby administration.
Allison Hill was inspired by Matthew
Cooper. The contact email for Alli-
son Hill is garzaanthony@example.org.
Allison Hill was famous for painting.
Allison Hill was a member of Habi-
tat for Humanity. Allison Hill mentors
Daniel Watkins. Allison Hill’s place of
death was Brownbury. Allison Hill’s
phone number is 538.990.8386. Allison
Hill works as a Civil engineer, consult-
ing. Allison Hill is the parent of Don-
ald Marsh. Allison Hill was a classmate
of Adam Villanueva. Allison Hill loved
eating tacos. Allison Hill went to Uni-
versity of Chicago.
Table 6: Empirical performance. For each reasoning type, we training on the training set and test on
the corresponding test set. Note that this is different from other experiments that focus on evaluation
over complementary reasoning test set.
Training Data I.I.D Comp Zero-shot
Parametric Reasoning 93.96 82.30 3.71
Contextual Reasoning 98.53 95.53 69.53
Complementary Reasoning 90.26 76.61 7.76
C MODELSCALING
We study whether our findings that “RL enables generalization in Complementary Reasoning from
sufficient atomic skills” persist as models scale. We compare Qwen-2.5-0.5B, Qwen-2.5-1.5B and
Qwen-2.5-3B due to limited compute. Figure 8 illustrates the performance trends across model sizes.
We observe consistent behaviors that strongly support the effectiveness of our proposed recipe.
As shown by the blue lines, SFT MEM+CTX leads to substantial performance jumps after RL COMP .
This improvement is particularly pronounced in the Zero-shot setting, indicating that the model with
sufficient atomic skills successfully generalizes the reasoning capabilities acquired during RL. In
contrast, SFT COMP (orange dashed line), while starting with decent performance, exhibits limited
growth after RL training (orange solid line). The gap between the pre-RL and post-RL performance
is marginal, suggesting that SFT with composite data may limit the model’s potential for further
generalization.
18
Work in Progress
Table 7: Empirical results on Complementary Reasoning test set.
Setting I.I.D Comp Zero-shot
SFT MEM+CTX 35.18 28.20 24.07
SFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX 28.43 28.34 27.89
SFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX →RLCOMP 74.00 62.47 49.56
SFT MEM+CTX+COMP 80.14 62.9043.25
SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP 73.11 60.8550.87
Crucially,these trends hold true across all model sizes. When the model size increases to 3B, the
superiority of SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP over SFT COMP →RLCOMP remains significant (e.g.,a gap of
approximately 13% in Zero-shot accuracy for the 3B model). This confirms that our conclusions are
robust to model scaling and implies that SFT MEM+CTX is a more effective foundation for scaling up
RL-based reasoning.
D DETAILS ONSUFFICIENCY OF THEFINDING
In Section 5.1, we focus on whether our proposed recipe “SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP ” consistently
yields superior generalization, compared to direct training on the target task “SFT COMP →RLCOMP ”
which is the common practice in real-world complex tasks. Here, we compare “SFT MEM+CTX
→RLCOMP ” with other possible baselines: 1) “SFT MEM+CTX ”: SFT with the entire MEMand CTX
data, which is the same as in Table 1b; 2) “SFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX ”: SFT with 80% of MEM
and CTXdata and then RL with the rest 20% of MEMand CTXdata. The portion is based on our
empirical results of splitting COMPdata; 3) “SFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX →RLCOMP ”: furthur RL
with COMPbased on “SFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX ”; 4) “SFT MEM+CTX+COMP ”: SFT with the mix
of MEM, CTXand COMPdata. Specifically, for RL COMP , we adopt the 12.8k random samples used
in Section 5.2. We show the performance on COMPtest set in Table 7.
It shows thatSFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX →RLCOMP has very similar performance compared with
our proposedSFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP , especially for Zero-shot setting. However, this does not
contradict our conclusion, as the capture of sufficient atomic skills and RL training are essential for
Zero-shot generalization and sufficient atomic skills are still the prerequisites. In addition, compar-
ing SFT MEM+CTX withSFT MEM+CTX →RLMEM+CTX , we find that RL with atomic skills may not
be beneficial to composite tasks. Note that for MEMand COMPdata, every test sample in COMP
would be either Composition or Zero-shot level (these two baselines have never seen any COMPdata
during training. Moreover, Table 7 further enhances the sufficiency of our findings that our recipe
SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP is the key to generalization.
It is interesting thatSFT MEM+CTX+COMP also manages to generalize to Zero-shot scenarios to some
extent and achieves comparable results with ourSFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP . This shows that SFT
can also generalize with careful mix of training data. However, this does not challenge our SFT
Memorization Paradox that SFT directly with composite data fails to generalize. Furthermore, the
setting itself is not as realistic-it is not trivial to obtain ample composite (COMP) data encompassing
both MEMand CTXskills. Also, it is difficult to mix COMPdata to SFT training with all atomic
skills. However, ourSFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP assumes a common post-training practice with an
initial SFT and a following RL stage. While the base model grasp the atomic skills (i.e.,today’s
available LLMs), we focus on the training strategies and data mix when we have some composite
data. And we demonstrate the condition of RL generalization.
E DETAILS ON OTHERFACTORS THATAFFECTGENERALIZATION
There are many factors affecting models’performance or generalizability. We showcase the sam-
ple efficiency and pass@k performance as some features to see why the model with atomic skills
are essentials for RL generalization in composite tasks. Here, we investigate from the perspective
of training dynamics of SFT MEM+CTX , the impact of training loss of the base model for RL, the
embedding distributions of the SFT and RL model and the uncertainty of the model.
19
Work in Progress
Figure 9: Training dynamics of SFT with parametric and contextual reasoning data over training
steps. Ability gains are calculated over MEM(Red Line), CTX(Blue Line) and COMP(Green Line),
respectively. As the training progresses, complementary reasoning ability emerges to some extent.
Figure 10: The impact of training steps (i.e.,training loss) of the SFT model on RL generalization.
E.1 THETRAININGDYNAMICS OFSFT MEM+CTX
SettingsTo check when and how the ability of complementary reasoning ability (COMP) emerges
through the training of parametric and contextual reasoningi.e.,SFT MEM+CTX , we showcase the
performance of MEM, CTXand COMPduring the SFT training over MEMand CTX. We study
Qwen-1.5B-Base and Qwen-0.5B-Base.
The ability of complementary reasoning emerges to some extent with the progress of both
parametric and contextual reasoning.Figure 9 shows the training dynamic over training steps.
First, it shows that as the SFT training with both MEMand CTXdata progresses, the ability of
COMPsomehow emerges with MEMand CTXto some extent. Second, the conclusion is consistent
over different model sizes, with larger models generalizes better to COMPwith MEMand CTXdata.
Third, it further demonstrates that contextual reasoning is the easiest (learned from relatively early
stage), while the parametric and complementary reasoning is relatively difficult.
E.2 THEIMPACT OFTRAININGLOSS FORRL GENERALIZATION
We investigate a critical question regarding the interplay between Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and
Reinforcement Learning (RL):Does the degree of SFT convergence dictate the model’s potential
for RL-based generalization?Specifically, we aim to determine if a ”grokking-like” phenomenon
exists–where continuous optimization of SFT loss, even after apparent metric saturation, further
unlocks the model’s reasoning capabilities during the RL stage. Also, we study at which checkpoint
(i.e.,training loss) may the model emerge the ability of generalization. We take four intermediate
checkpoints of SFTMEM+CTX to further conduct RLCOMP and evaluate the performance on three levels
of generalization.
20
Work in Progress
Figure 10 illustrates the performance trajectories across SFT checkpoints (1k to 4k steps), revealing
three distinct phases of capability emergence:
•Insufficient Representation.At the early stage (i.e.,1k steps, Training Loss≈0.44), the model
has not yet internalized the necessary reasoning patterns. Consequently, it fails to generalize effec-
tively during the RL stage, resulting in suboptimal performance across all metrics (e.g., Zero-shot
accuracy is significantly lower compared to later stages).
•Emergence of Capabilities.As the SFT loss decreases to approximately0.16(i.e.,2k steps), we
observe a sharp “phase transition” in downstream RL performance. While the base SFT model’s
direct performance (dashed lines) shows only moderate improvements, itslatent potentialfor RL
adaptation increases dramatically. This suggests that the critical structures required for reasoning
generalization are established during this interval.
•Saturation and Robustness.Performance peaks around 3k steps (Loss≈0.05). Interestingly,
further extending training to 4k steps—where the model nearly memorizes the training data (Loss≈
0.0004)—does not yield further significant gains, nor does it lead to performance degradation. This
indicates that while “grokking” (delayed generalization) effectively occurs between 1k and 3k steps,
the benefit saturates once the loss drops below a certain threshold (<0.05). The model becomes
robust, maintaining its high plasticity for RL even when deeply fitted to the SFT distribution.
In conclusion,minimizing SFT loss is crucial up to a point. The generalization capability for RL
does not scale infinitely with lower loss but requires a sufficient ”incubation” period (up to 3k steps
in our setting) to fully emerge.
E.3 ANALYSIS OFLATENTSPACEDYNAMICS VIAPCA
Setting: Layer-wise PCA ProjectionTo investigate the internal mechanism behind the superior
performance of SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP compared to SFT COMP →RLCOMP , we conduct a Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) on the hidden states of the models. Our goal is to visualize how dif-
ferent training strategies affect the representation of Parametric, Contextual, and Complementary
Reasoning.
Formally, for a given model pair (Anchor ModelManc and Target ModelMtgt) and a specific layerl,
we extract the hidden states corresponding to the last token of the input queries. LetHanc
l ∈R N×D
andH tgt
l ∈R N×D denote the hidden state matrices forNqueries at layerl, whereDis the hidden
dimension. To capture the relative shift induced by training, we fit the PCA transformation on
Manc’s statesH anc
l , which defines a 2D coordinate system based on the principal variations of the
reference model. We then projectM tgt’s statesH tgt
l into this fixed coordinate system. The shift
vector for layerlis calculated as the difference between the centroids of the projected target states
and the anchor states. This process is repeated for all layers. Figure 11 shows the layer-wise shifts
by scatter points. The large markers represent the global centroid shift (z∗) for each Reasoning type.
Disentanglement of atomic skills in SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP As shown in the top-left panel of
Figure 11, SFT MEM+CTX exhibits a significant “disentanglement” of atomic reasoning types. The
centroid for MEMdata (Blue Circle) and CTXdata (Orange Triangle) move in distinct directions
and magnitudes within the principal component space. This suggests that the SFT MEM+CTX stage
effectively separates the internal representations required for parametric recall versus contextual
reasoning. Furthermore, in the subsequent RL stage (top-right panel), this separation is maintained
and refined. Notably, the COMPdata (Green Square) aligns closely with the established distributions
of MEMand CTXdata. This indicates that the model can effectively generalize the logic learned
from MEMand CTXdata to the composite COMPtasks.
Entanglement of skills in SFT COMP →RLCOMP .In contrast, the bottom row reveals a phe-
nomenon of “representation entanglement”. Please note that the scale of the axis for the bottom
row is lower than that for the top row. For the model trained only on COMPdata, the embeddings for
MEM, CTX, and COMPqueries remain tightly clustered together, after both the SFT stage (bottom-
left) and the RL stage (bottom-right). The centroids for all three data types are located close to the
origin with overlapping distributions. This lack of separation implies that SFT COMP fails to distin-
21
Work in Progress
Figure 11: PCA Analysis of SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP and SFT COMP →RLCOMP . The scatter points
represent the layer-wise shifts. The large markers represent the global centroid shift (z ∗) for each
reasoning type.
guish between the underlying mechanisms of parametric and contextual reasoning, instead learning
a coupled representation.
We hypothesize that the superior generalization capability of SFTMEM+CTX →RL(Comp) stems from
this structural disentanglement. By explicitly separating the latent representations of parametric and
contextual capabilities during the SFT stage, the model establishes a robust basis that facilitates
better adaptation during the RL phase. Conversely, the coupled representations in SFT COMP limit
the model’s ability to distinctly apply these capabilities, leading to suboptimal performance.
E.4 MODELUNCERTAINTY
We investigate the evolution of model uncertainty (quantified by the average prediction entropy
×100) to understand the underlying dynamics of RL generalization. Table 8 presents the entropy
metrics across I.I.D., Compositional, and Zero-shot subsets.
Uncertainty is correlated with SFT convergence, not necessarily RL potential.We first address
whether high uncertainty is a prerequisite for effective RL exploration. Comparing the SFTMEM+CTX
checkpoints, the uncertainty drops significantly from 3k steps (12.92) to 4k steps (7.13) as the loss
minimizes. Despite this lower starting entropy, we previously observed that the 4k-step model sus-
tains high performance after RL. This indicates that a ”calibrated” and confident SFT model (lower
entropy) does not hinder subsequent RL generalization.
22
Work in Progress
Table 8: Analysis of model uncertainty (measured by average entropy×100) across different train-
ing settings.Overalldenotes average uncertainty on the test set, while the breakdown columns show
uncertainty on I.I.D., Compositional (Comp.), and Zero-shot settings. Lower values indicate higher
model confidence.
Setting Overall I.I.D. Comp. Zero-shot
Effect of Training Steps (SFT onMEM+CTX)
SFT MEM+CTX 3k step 12.92 13.41 12.05 13.12
SFT MEM+CTX 4k step 7.13 6.33 7.45 8.46
10%COMPdata forSFT COMP , 90%COMPdata forRL COMP
SFT COMP 8.93 6.56 9.89 12.96
SFT COMP →RLCOMP 8.99 8.49 8.97 10.17
SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP 2.58 1.63 2.54 4.84
30%COMPdata forSFT COMP , 70%COMPdata forRL COMP
SFT COMP 7.18 5.24 7.98 10.46
SFT COMP →RLCOMP 6.11 4.85 6.36 8.65
SFT COMP →RLCOMP 2.90 1.96 2.84 5.17
90%COMPdata forSFT COMP , 10%COMPdata forRL COMP
SFT COMP 4.14 2.38 4.05 8.36
SFT COMP →RLCOMP 4.11 3.27 3.97 6.25
SFT COMP →RLCOMP 4.10 3.23 3.88 6.46
Task Difficulty Indicator.Consistently across all settings, the uncertainty is highest in theZero-
shotsubset (e.g.,12.96for 10% SFT(G3)). This aligns with intuition, as the model exhibits lower
confidence on unseen distributions.
SFT MEM+CTX Facilitates Efficient RL Adaptation.A key insight emerges when comparing the
post-RL behaviors. In the 30% data setting,30%SFT COMP (7.18) and SFT MEM+CTX (7.13) start
at remarkably similar uncertainty levels. However, after applying identical RL training, SFT COMP
→RLCOMP shows minimal entropy reduction (7.18→6.11), suggesting the model struggles to find
a more optimal, confident policy. In contrast, our recipe SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP achieves a drastic
reduction in uncertainty (7.13→2.90). This demonstrates that the model with sufficient atomic
skills does not merely provide ”randomness” for exploration; rather, it structures the latent space (see
Figure 11) in a way that allows RL to efficiently converge to a high-confidence, correct solution.
F TERMINOLOGIES
23
Work in Progress
Table 9: Glossary of Symbols and Abbreviations
Symbol/Abbreviation Description
MEMParametric reasoning type.
CTXContextual reasoning type.
COMPComplementary reasoning type.
RL Reinforcement Learning, one of the core training strategies discussed
in this work.
SFT Supervised Fine-Tuning, one of the core training strategies discussed
in this work.
LoRA Low-Rank Adaptation, one of the training strategies discussed in this
work.
SFT MEM+CTX The model obtained after performing SFT on the combined training
set of MEMand CTX.
SFT COMP The model obtained after performing SFT on the training set of COMP.
SFT 10%COMP The model obtained after performing SFT on 10% random samples of
COMPtraining set.
SFT MEM+CTX →RLCOMP The model obtained after performing RL on the training set of COMP
from SFT MEM+CTX .
SFT COMP →RLCOMP The model obtained after performing RL on the training set of COMP
from SFT COMP .
I.I.D Independent and Identically Distributed generalization type in the test
set.
24