End-to-end Deep Reinforcement Learning for Stochastic Multi-objective
Optimization in C-VRPTW
Abdo Abouelrousa,1, Laurens Blieka, Yaoxin Wua, Yingqian Zhanga
aDepartment of Information Systems, Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Innovation Sciences, Technical
University Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Abstract
Inthiswork, weconsiderlearning-basedapplicationsinroutingtosolveaVehicleRoutingvariant
characterized by stochasticity and multiple objectives. Such problems are representative of practical
settings where decision-makers have to deal with uncertainty in the operational environment as well
as multiple conflicting objectives due to different stakeholders. We specifically consider travel time
uncertainty. We also consider two objectives, total travel time and route makespan, that jointly
targetoperationalefficiencyandlaborregulationsonshiftlength, althoughmore/differentobjectives
could be incorporated. Learning-based methods offer earnest computational advantages as they can
repeatedly solve problems with limited interference from the decision-maker. We specifically focus
on end-to-end deep learning models that leverage the attention mechanism and multiple solution
trajectories. These models have seen several successful applications in routing problems. However,
since travel times are not a direct input to these models due to the large dimensions of the travel time
matrix, accounting for uncertainty is a challenge, especially in the presence of multiple objectives.
In turn, we propose a model that simultaneously addresses stochasticity and multi-objectivity and
provide a refined training mechanism for this model through scenario clustering to reduce training
time. Our results show that our model is capable of constructing a Pareto Front of good quality
within acceptable run times compared to three baselines. We also provide two ablation studies to
assess our model’s suitability in different settings.
Keywords:Stochastic, Multi-Objective Optimization, Vehicle Routing Problem, Reinforcement
Learning, Active Search, End-to-End
1. Introduction
Real-life Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problems, such as routing problems, are often char-
acterized by certain challenging features. Examples of such features include stochasticity and the
presence of several (conflicting) objectives simultaneously. In applications like the Vehicle Routing
Email addresses:a.g.m.abouelrous@tue.nl(Abdo Abouelrous),l.bliek@tue.nl(Laurens Bliek),
y.wu2@tue.nl(Yaoxin Wu),yqzhang@tue.nl(Yingqian Zhang)
1corresponding author
arXiv:2512.01518v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
Problem (VRP), accounting for these features during decision-making is important. Otherwise,
sub-optimal decisions may lead to elevated costs.
Furthermore, computational budgets are often limited in practice as solutions need to be gener-
ated quickly in accordance with operational requirements (Horvitz, 2013). To that end, one seeks
optimization techniques that are not only capable of delivering solutions efficiently but also deliv-
ering near-optimal solutions in the presence of the aforementioned features.
In the literature, numerous techniques have been proposed to solve CO problems, ranging from
hand-crafted heuristics to Machine Learning (ML) models that are independently able to generate
solutions - also known as end-to-end methods. The spectrum also covers hybrid methods, which
incorporate both heuristics and ML models. ML models are particularly useful in cases where
problem parameters follow a known distribution. In such cases, an ML model can be trained on
a dataset of problems from this distribution and used to generate solutions for problem instances
arising in the future.
The ability of ML models to generate solutions statistically - even when the solution distribution
is unknown beforehand - by leveraging data from the operational environment to make decisions in
a principled fashion, has been repeatedly stressed in the literature (Bengio et al., 2021; Giuffrida
et al., 2022; Mazyavkina et al., 2021). This is because ML models have the capacity to learn from
the collective expert knowledge. Through learning common solution structures and relationships
to problem parameter input, ML model can continuously solve different problems. Although the
training resources required are not trivial, ML models can be quickly applied for solving thereafter
(Zhang et al., 2021). This is in stark contrast to hand-crafted heuristics which, generally, do not
leverage information from the solution structure (d O Costa et al., 2020) and may be challenging
to repeatedly develop and/or replicate for newer instances Accorsi et al. (2022).
For the large part, the CO problems treated in the literature by ML models were deterministic
and had a single objective. Real-life problems, contrarily, are often characterized by uncertainty
and multiple (conflicting) objectives. The objective of our study is to extend the framework of ML
in optimization to settings that jointly combine the stochastic and multi-objective features. In our
estimation, this is an under-studied application with significant industrial relevance.
Solving a multi-objective problem requires the definition of a Pareto Front (Ngatchou et al.,
2005), comprising of a set of Pareto optimal solutions by which improving one objective can not be
done without worsening other objectives. Solutions would then have to be validated on a sample
of scenario realizations to estimate their quality and feasibility. In an optimization context, this
poses a challenge that requires novel intervention. This is because multi-objectivity induces the
generation of several solutions to estimate the Pareto Front, while stochasticity imposes that each
solution be feasible with a good score for a large number of stochastic realizations. The repeated
2
evaluation of multiple solutions, in this setting, is a cumbersome task that requires careful choices
in the optimization methodology to maintain computational costs within practical limits.
In response, we present a framework that addresses the given computational issues in this paper
to solve Capacitated Vehcile Routing Problem with Time Windows (C-VRPTW). We specifically
focusonstochasticityintraveltimesandconsidertwoobjectivesthataretraveltime-based, although
our method could account for more different objectives. The major contributions prescribed by this
paper are:
•Presenting the first end-to-end (independently constructs solution without interference of a
heuristic) deep-learning model that jointly treats stochasticity and multiple objectives for
routing.
•Providing a retraining mechanism for parameter uncertainty through an active search that
considers multiple objectives rather than just one objective.
•Presenting a scenario-clustering technique that enhances the computational efficiency of model
retraining during active search.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces previous research.
Section 3 describes the relevant problem in detail. Section 4 outlines our methodology. Section 5
presents numerical experiments and results. Lastly, Section 6 asserts the conclusions.
2. Previous Work
We restrict our attention to ML applications in stochastic and/or multi-objective cases for
routing. These models generally rely on concepts of Reinforcement Learning (RL) to make decisions.
These approaches fall into two major categories, hybrid and end-to-end. Hybrid models integrate
a ML model with a heuristic to enhance the heuristic’s performance. The way in which the ML
model is applied largely depends on the heuristic at hand. A common example is that the RL agent
selects a heuristic with some probability from a set of discrete heuristics. In contrast, End-to-end
models are able to independently solve a routing problem without interference of a heuristic. When
deciding on the ordering of node visits, the decision to visit a nodejafter nodeiis based on a
probabilityp ij. Such a probability may be determined by features of nodesiandj, the status of the
current (partial) solution and the estimated corresponding reward. In both categories, the decisions
are determined by interaction of the problem input with the ML model’s parameters which are
optimized during model training to maximize the final reward.
For the multi-objective setting, works like Wu et al. (2024) and Deng et al. (2024) explore
applications to routing with hybrid methods through genetic algorithms. Yao et al. (2017), on
the other hand, focus on hyper-heuristic selection by the RL agent to complete a solution. In the
Stochastic setting, Bayliss (2021) make use of simulation-augmented optimization for urban-routing.
3
Joe & Lau (2020) employ a hybrid approach with a genetic algorithm to address a dynamic problem
with stochastic customers. Works integrating both stochastic and multi-objective components are
rare, at least in routing. Tozer et al. (2017) propose an RL model that selects voting methods based
on social choice theory. Niu et al. (2024) and Niu et al. (2021) embed a decision tree that learns
node orderings in a genetic algorithm in location and vehicle routing, while Peng et al. (2023) adapt
the same approach but for multi-modal transportation. Zhang et al. (2024), in contrast, optimize
multi-modal transportation routing using a framework aided by simple Q-learning.
Recent innovations in the literature have prompted the use of Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) to solve CO problems. Among the earliest of end-to-end ML applications in routing was
Kool et al. (2018) who leverage a Graph Attention network Veličković et al. (2017) to estimatepij.
Kwon et al. (2020) extended on this by presenting a model that uses multiple solution trajectories
during model training and solution inference (generation) which we refer to as Policy Optimization
with Multiple Optima (POMO) for simplicity. POMO is able to process complex graph information
and greedily decide on the next node visit most likely to minimize the objective value(s). The model
is well-credited for its ability to generate solutions of high quality in a relatively short time compared
to alternative solvers and heuristics for a multitude of routing problems given a certain distribution.
During training, POMO learns the relationship between node orderings and the resulting final
objective values to look for orderings that minimize the objective in the future.
The impressive performance of DRL-based methods like POMO has led to adaptations in multi-
objective and stochastic cases for routing. For multi-objective CO routing problems, DRL has
been proposed in works like Sarker et al. (2020), Wang et al. (2023), Chen et al. (2023) and Lin
et al. (2022). For applications in stochastic CO routing problems, works like Schmitt-Ulms et al.
(2022), Achamrah (2024), Iklassov et al. (2024) and Zhou et al. (2023) showcase end-to-end methods
addressing demand and travel-time uncertainty, which is usually accounted for by fine-tuning the
pre-trained model’s parameters. In these works, routing problems are solved in an end-to-end
fashion whereby the RL model decides on successive node visits. This is in contrast to other DRL
innovations that rely on hybrid methods (Jia et al.; Son et al., 2024) for stochastic and multi-
objective applications.
To the best of our knowledge, there is no end-to-end DRL mechanism for solving routing (or CO)
problems characterized by both uncertainty and multiple objectives. Many of the multi-objective
DRL architectures can not be easily adapted to account for uncertainty and vice-versa. On the other
end, existing hybrid methods depend on the heuristics at hand which are often problem-specific. For
example, deriving voting methods or learning node orderings with decision trees may not be suitable
for more complicated vehicle routing variants such as ones with time windows. Ideally, one would
like to come up with an end-to-end model that can be easily adapted to solve a multitude of routing
4
problems without the complexities associated with external assumptions or hyper-heuristics. The
novelty of this paper is embedded in deriving such a framework for solving C-VRPTW, although
the framework can be easily adopted to solve other routing problems as explained below.
3. Problem Description
Consider a C-VRPTW instance with parameter inputPand stochastic travel timesT, where
T ∈ P. Furthermore, assume the problem is characterized by a set ofKobjectives for which
preferenceλ k corresponds to objectivefk(.)∀k∈K. The preferencesλ k are embedded in a vector
λ. For simplicity, assumeP
k∈K λk = 1and0≤f k(.).
Such preferences could reflect the decision-makers view of importance of one objective relative
to another. Such preferences may not be explicitly defined initially, but repeatedly solving the
problem with differentλk values enables the decision-maker to understand the relationship between
decisions and corresponding objective values through the construction of a Pareto Front. Thereafter,
the decision-maker can choose decisions on the Pareto Front that align with their preferences. The
proposed model should therefore be able to approximate a Pareto optimal solution for any set of
preferences as much as possible.
Letnbe the number of nodes that may be visited in a solution andVbe the set of nodes, so
that|V|=n. Each nodei∈Vis characterized by some features that depend on the problem at
hand, such as demand or time-windows. Between each pair of nodes, there is an arc with travel
times corresponding to the stochastic parametersT. That said,Tis an×nmatrix with elements
tij representing the travel times between nodesiandj∈V. Lett ij follow some predetermined
probability distributionf ij(.). Depending on the problem, a depot may be defined as well. If so,
we index the depot by 0, so that0∈Vand define stochastic travel timest0i andt i0 for each other
nodei∈V.
The objective is to jointly optimize all theKobjectives while satisfying operational constraints.
In C-VRPTW, time-window constraints, as well as objective values, are largely determined by
travel times. As such, we are dealing with a CO problem where the objective values and constraint
satisfaction for a set of actions/decisions are uncertain.
Our proposed model strives to define a mapping - specified by a set of parametersθ- between
graph information and associated node ordering in a solution that maximizes rewards (i.e. delivers
good objective values). Our model takes into account the uncertainty in travel times represented
by the graph’s arc lengths and conflicting rewards (objectives). The mechanism by which we define
this mapping serves the purpose of our study. Furthermore, cases with uncertain travel times
Tpose a greater challenge than others in the literature such as in Niu et al. (2021) which deal
with stochastic demand. This is because the number of travel time parameters is much more than
5
demand parameters, invoking a larger computational capacity to process the associated uncertainty.
Furthermore, different node orderings can give different feasibility and solution scores for a given set
of travel time realizations, in contrast to the case with stochastic demand. In the following section,
we present a method that treats the problem presented above.
4. Methodology
We propose a single machine learning model whose training is partitioned into two phases. One
phase deals with the multi-objective component of the problem and the latter with the stochastic
component. Our model is a variant of the POMO model whose parameters correspond toθ. It is
firstly trained on a sample of multi-objective deterministic instances. Afterwards, the parameters
embedding information on the travel times are re-trained to account for the stochasticity. The
retraining is done by means of an Efficient Active Search (EAS) which we will explain below. Finally,
given problem inputPand a vector of preferencesλ, we apply a solution generation procedure with
the re-trained POMO model to produce a solution. The Pareto Front can then be estimated by
repeatedly solving the problemPfor different values ofλ. An overview of our overall method is
illustrated in Figure 1. In the following section, we elaborate on the components of our approach.
Figure 1: Visual illustration of our complete approach using pre-trained POMO model.
4.1. Multi-Objective Component
The standard POMO model seen in Kwon et al. (2020) defines a mapping with parametersθ
between problem parameter inputPand a resulting reward/objective value. More precisely, the
model’s main architecture is given by an encoder-decoder duo. The encoder with parametersθenc
takes as input problem parameters to construct an embeddingω, which is a summary of the problem
features as explained in Kool et al. (2018).ωis then used alongside other dynamic information
pertaining to the current status of the solution by the decoder with parametersθdec to take actions
6
until a solution is complete with a corresponding reward. Since the reward is constant for every set
of parameter inputP, the decoder can automatically processωand make a decision.
In the multi-objective setting, the reward depends on the preferencesλ. To that end, the
information needed to make a decision is not entirely prescribed by the embeddingω. In turn, Lin
et al. (2022) propose a multi-objective variant of POMO. The idea is to equip the decoder with a
Multi-Layer Perceptron with parametersψthat takesλas input and determines the corresponding
decoder parametersθ(λ|ψ). The resulting POMO model can then be used to construct a Pareto
Front by repeatedly sampling realizations ofλand solving the corresponding problem for a single
realization one at a time. Since POMO models can solve a single instance quite efficiently, the
Pareto Front would not require a significant computational budget to be constructed.
Figure 2 depicts the process by which a solution is generated with the model of Lin et al.
(2022). This model and its training correspond to the Multi-objective component in Figure 1. In
the following section, we explain how the embeddingωgenerated from this model is updated by
means of an EAS to adapt to stochastic travel timesT ∈ P.
Figure 2: Overview of solution generation with the model of Lin et al. (2022).
To compute the reward for a given solutionπi for problem instancesi, Lin et al. (2022) propose
a linear aggregation technique. TheKobjectives are aggregated into a single objective (reward) as
follows:
X
k∈K
λkfk(πi)(1)
withf k(.)representing objectivek. The term in (1) corresponds to the rewardL(π i|λ, si)for
solutionπ i given instancesi and preferencesλ. Solutionπ i is generated according to a probability
distributionp θ(λ)(πi|si)which can be constructed in a greedy or sampling fashion.
The model is trained by repeatedly sampling a preference vectorλand a corresponding batch
ofBinstances. Thereafter,Mdifferent solution trajectories are created where each trajectory
represents one possible solution. The average reward over all theMdifferent solution trajectories
7
andBinstances is computed, where the reward from one trajectory corresponds to some aggregation
of theKobjectives such as in (1). The average reward is, in turn, used to compute the loss function
and associated gradient for optimizing the model’s parametersθ. To estimate the gradient loss, we
make use of the REINFORCE training algorithm of Williams (1992) with the ADAM optimizer.
The training algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1Training POMO Model from Lin et al. (2022)
1:Input: preference distributionΛ, instances distributionS, number of Training stepsT, number
of objectivesK, batch sizeB, number of solution trajectoriesM.
2:Output: model parameterθ.
3:fort= 1···Tdo
4:Sampleλ k fromΛfork∈K.
5:SampleBinstances fromS
6:GenerateMdifferent solutions usingp θ(λk)(.|si)for each instances i.
7:Define shared baseline reward for instances i usingb i = 1
M
PM
j=1 L(πj
i |λ, si)∀i{1,···, B}
8:Compute gradient∆ θ = 1
BM
PB
j=1
PM
i=1[(L(πj
i |λ, si)−b i)∆θ(λ) logp θ(λ)(πj
i |si)]
9:θ=ADAM(θ,∆ θ)
10:end for
11:returnθ.
4.2. Stochastic Component
Given that travel times are not encoded with the problem input for POMO, but implicitly
represented by a parametrized embeddingω, an EAS is introduced in Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022)
by which the model is re-trained to adapt to the different possible stochastic realizations ofT. In
the retraining phase, onlyωis updated. In each step, a gradient∆ω is computed withMsolution
trajectories by the following formula:
∆ω = 1
M
MX
j=1
[(L(πj|λ, s)−b)∆ω(λ) logp ω(λ)(πj|s)](2)
andωis updated by means of gradient ascent. For consistency, we use the ADAM optimizer for the
update. Observe that the gradient computation in (2) is similar to the one in Line 8 in Algorithm
1 - based on the REINFORCE algorithm. The major differences is that this update concerns only
one instance rather than a batch ofBinstances, and the only parameters being updated areω. As
such, the probability distributionpω(λ)(πj|s)is determined by updates inω.
The embedding is updated over a series ofTω steps for instanceswith expected travel times
E[T]and then evaluated onWstochastic realizations everyt e iterations.t e can be interpreted
as the evaluation frequency. Further, the numberWshould be sufficiently large to address many
possible realizations. Since this evaluation is expensive, it is only done in a few of theTω steps. The
ωvalue that gives the lowest mean aggregate objective value over allWscenarios in the evaluation
steps is selected as the final embedding.
8
There is an important consideration regarding the active search described in Schmitt-Ulms
et al. (2022). In the evaluation epoch, the resulting embeddingωis evaluated on a large number of
realizationsW. Many of these realizations are similar and the resulting objective values as specified
by the pretrained POMO model from Section 2, rendering these evaluations somewhat repetitive
and unnecessary. Ideally, we are interested in evaluations that are distinctive in input and resulting
objective values. Secondly, becauseWis rather large, this constrains the number of evaluations
we can carry out during retraining. That said, a more efficient evaluation method may not only
reduce retraining time but also allow us to evaluate the embedding more frequently with a smaller
te, giving us a larger search space that may possibly result in a larger embedding.
To account for the aforementioned considerations, we propose some adjustments to the EAS.
Firstly, we sample theWpossible scenarios. Thereafter, we cluster these methods to get a subset
of scenarios that are sufficiently representative of the spectrum of realizations. To do that, we use
the clustering method of Abouelrous et al. (2022).
We consider the initial embeddingωgenerated by training the entire model in Algorithm 1.
We solve, theWproblems in batches ofBto speed up their evaluation. For each instances i, we
select the solution trajectory from theMtrajectories with the highest aggregate rewardL(π∗|si) =
maxj∈{1,···,M} L(πj|si)which will be used to compare with other scenarios. The highest is chosen
instead of the mean as it represents the best solution found. The aggregate reward is calculated
with fixed preferences ˆλduring clustering, although the preferences may change later during the
active search. Fixing parameter values and assuming perfect information has been shown to be very
beneficial for clustering (Abouelrous et al., 2022). Two scenariossi ands k are clustered together if:
|L(π∗|si)−L(π ∗|sk)|< ϵ(3)
with|.|being the absolute operator andϵbeing some threshold. Thus, scenarioss i ands k are
clustered together if their objective values with the initial embedding are sufficiently close.
The first scenario automatically forms a cluster. The scenarios are compared to the clusters in
order. So, scenarios k is compared to the scenario representing cluster 1. If it meets (3), they are
clustered together. Otherwise,s k is compared to the scenario in cluster 2 and so forth. IfsK is
compared with all existing clusters and not clustered with any, it forms a new cluster. The result
of the clustering procedure is a subset ofW < Wscenarios. These scenarios are then used in the
embedding evaluations which happen everyte iterations. Since Wis much smaller thanW, we can
opt for a smallerte value and evaluate the embeddings more frequently and efficiently.
Our active search is summarized in Algorithm 2. An important distinction with the active
search proposed in Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022) is that preferencesλare repeatedly sampled during re-
training to ensure that the uncertainty is incorporated under different sets of preferences determined
9
by the decision-maker. When new preferences are sampled, the decoder parameters have to be
updated, but one should ensure that the embeddingωis not altered as it is being retrained (Line
14). Similarly, during evaluation (Line 20), all decoder parameters are updated exceptω. We also
fix the preference vectorλduring evaluation (Line 20) to ensure a fair evaluation as the model’s
performance for different values ofλmay be uneven.
The returnedω ∗ is then saved to solve the problem instance with unknown travel times using a
greedy policy that maximizes the probability of the next visited node. The distribution of nodes to
be visited is defined by the retrained POMO model. We refer to the model trained using Algorithm
2 asEAS-cluster.
Algorithm 2EAS-cluster Training
1:Input: number of search stepsT ω, total number of realizations to considerW, clustering
thresholdϵ, batch size during evaluationH, initial preferencesˆλ, evaluation frequencyte.
2:Output: updated embeddingω ∗
3:Initialization: initial embeddingω
4:fortheWscenariosdo
5:Sample them in batches ofH
6:Evaluate theHinstances usingωand fixed preferences ˆλ.
7:Cluster the instances according to (3)
8:end for
9: W= Nr. of clusters.
10:ω ∗ =ω
11:Evaluateω ∗ on theWscenarios with ˆλto determine initial mean aggregate rewardL(π∗|W , ω∗)
12:fort= 1···T ω do
13:Sample new preferencesλ
14:Update Decoder parameters without updatingω
15:Solve deterministic instance using current embeddingω ∗ for givenλ.
16:Compute gradient∆ ω using (2).
17:ω=ADAM(∆ ω, ω)
18:iftis an evaluation epoch (a multiple oft e)then
19:Evaluateωon the Wscenarios with ˆλ. LetL(π ∗|W , ω)be the resulting mean aggregate
reward. Ensure thatωis not updated in the evaluation.;
20:ifL(π ∗|W , ω)< L(π∗|W , ω∗)then
21:ω ∗ =ω
22:L(π ∗|W , ω∗) =L(π ∗|W , ω)
23:end if
24:end if
25:end for
26:returnω ∗.
4.3. Extension to other DRL Architectures
Our proposed framework is largely based on the POMO architecture common to both the multi-
objective and stochastic component. In that sense, our framework is largely restricted to POMO-
based architectures. However, the architecture is largely considered a pillar in using DRL for
solving CO problems (Wang et al., 2024). Much of the recent literature on multi-objective DRL
work mentioned in Section 2 also makes use of encoder-decoder architecture of Lin et al. (2022)
10
making the framework relevant to many applications.
Extension to other DRL architectures is not straightforward. Assuming another encoder-decoder
architecture where the decoder parameters contain a graph embeddingω, the general framework
may be still applicable. However, there is no clear guarantee on the performance of the model which
is also subject to how the decoder interacts with the preference vectorλ.
Figure 1 offers an important guideline, however, into solving stochastic multi-objective problems.
One should first establish the multi-objective component before proceeding with the stochastic one.
The reason being that the model should first be able to generate multiple diverse solutions for a
given problem before being able to assess these solutions on a set of stochastic scenarios. This is
particularly evident in the retraining mechanism in Section 4.2 whereby preference vectorsλare
repeatedly sampled during the EAS in Algorithm 2.
5. Numerical Experiments
To evaluate our method, we propose a series of numerical experiments where we solve a bi-
objective(K= 2)C-VRPTWwithstochastictraveltimes. Wejointlyminimizetheobjectiveoftotal
travel times and makespan (total time consumed by longest route). We compare the performance
of our method on unseen instances relative to alternative methods. For the comparison, we consider
the final objective value as well as the total run time. In the following sections, we elaborate on the
set-up of our numerical experiments and analyze their results.
5.1. Set Up
We consider three instance classes of sizesn∈ {50,100,200}withB= 20instances for each
n. For all instance classes, the locations are given in 2-D space where the x-y coordinates are
sampled from a square of length 1. The vehicle capacities are 40, 50 and 70 for the three classes
in increasingn. Node demand is sampled uniformly as integer from the interval[1,9]. Time
windows are such that the lower time windowtw low is sampled uniformly as integer from the
interval [0,16], the time window widthtwwidth from the interval [2,8] and the upper time window
equal tomin{tw low +tw width, twhorizon}with thetw horizon being the planning horizon. Naturally,
the depot’s time window is[0, twhorizon], and we settw horizon to 18. Service times are sampled
uniformly between [0.2,0.5]. Lastly, the mean travel timesE[T]are equal to the euclidean distance,
and the travel times follow a normal distribution with standard deviation0.2×E[tij]for arc(i, j).
For each instance sizen, we train a different POMO model with 200 epochs and 100,000 episodes,
giving a total of 20,000,000 instances. The instances were sampled from the aforementioned dis-
tribution in batches of 64 forn= 50and 32 forn= 100,200. Training was conducted on a GPU
node with 2 Intel Xeon Platinum 8360Y (Intel (2025)) Processors and a NVIDIA A100 Accelerator
11
(Nvidia (2025)). The training times of the multi-objective POMO model were 18, 60 and 144 hours
forn=50, 100 and 200.
For EAS-cluster, we initially consider a sample ofW= 1,000scenarios in batches ofH= 64
from which we decide on the clustersW. In doing so, we consider initial preferencesˆλ1 = ˆλ2 = 0.5to
assign all objectives equal importance when reducing scenarios. Two scenarios are clustered together
if their aggregated objective valuesˆλ1f1(π∗) + ˆλ2f2(π∗)differ by less thanϵ= 1%whereπ ∗ is the
best solution found by the pre-trained ML model from Section 2 before EAS for the corresponding
instance.
Forn=50, 100 and 200, EAS-cluster produced 7.3, 6.5 and 5.75 clusters on average across the
B= 20instances. This shows that we can significantly reduce the number of scenarios as many
of these correspond to similar figures off1(.)andf 2(.)for fixed ˆλ. Furthermore, the number of
clusters deceases asnincreases, likely due to differences in objective values becoming less significant
as objective values like travel time become larger for largern.
Once the scenarios are clustered, we conduct an active search withTω = 2,500steps where the
embedding is evaluated everyte = 100steps. We use three benchmark methods, that test different
aspects of our study. They are as follows:
•NoEAS:the model without active search, which is simply the multi-objective POMO model
from Lin et al. (2022) without any updates to embeddingωapplied to solve the deterministic
instance. This baseline has been repeatedly shown to outperform other methods such as
NSGA-II (Kalyanmoy, 2002) and MOEA/D Zhang & Li (2007) in solving multi-objective
combinatorial optimization problems, especially in routing, so we focus on comparing with it.
We generate 101 values ofλ, whereλ1 is computed from 100 evenly spaced intervals in the
range [0,1] andλ2 = 1−λ 1 to represent the Pareto Front.
•EAS-basic:with the active search of Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022) witht e = 250. Similarly,
we use the same 100 evenly spacedλrealizations as above. Solution inference is done using a
greedy policy defined by the retrained model.
•LGA:the method of Niu et al. (2021). It is a learning-based Genetic Algorithm which makes
use of a decision-tree to learn optimal customer orderings. We adjust this method slightly to
allow for time-window configurations, since it was originally developed for a VRP variant with
stochastic demand only. Adding time-windows increases the frequency of infeasible solutions.
We respond to this by increasing the number of Genetic Algorithm iterations to 2,000 - from
the original 200 - and the number of evaluation scenarios in the population to 50 - from the
original 10. LGA required no pre-training, although a new ML supervised model had to be
trained for each instance during solution generation.
12
The resulting solutions for each method and preferenceλare evaluated onR= 500stochastic
realizations of the travel times. The resulting mean objective value is used for comparison as it
represents the expected objective value at the Pareto Front for the givenλ. Infeasible realizations
are excluded from the evaluation. Solution Inference was done on the same GPU nodes used for
training, (Intel, 2025; Nvidia, 2025). For LGA, no GPU is needed, so an AMD EPYC 9654 (AMD,
2025) CPU node was used. The results of the baselines compared to our method on the proposed
set of instances are given in the following section.
5.2. Results
To compare results, we consider the same hyper-volume technique mentioned in Lin et al. (2022).
LetPdefine the Pareto Front for a certain policy andr∗ be some reference point that is dominated
by all solutions inP. Then, the hyper-volumeHV(P)ofPis given by the volume of areaSthat
is defined as follows:
S={r∈R k|∃y∈ Psuch thaty≺r≺r ∗}(4)
wherey≺rindicates that solutionydominates solutionr. Given a baselineland instanceb,
the associated hyper-volume is given byHV(Pb)l. We are particularly interested in the percentage
increase in hyper-volume due to using EAS-cluster. This percentage is then averaged over allB
instances in the test set to give our main performance measureZthat is given by:
Z= 1
B
BX
b=1
[HV(P b)EAS−cluster −HV(P b)l]×100
HV(P b)l
(5)
For EAS-cluster and EAS-basic the retraining times of the active search are compared. We
report the average ratiotfof EAS-cluster’s active searcht EAS−cluster
av relative to the active search
of EAS-basict basic
av . More precisely:
tfav = tEAS−cluster
av
tEAS−basicav
(6)
such that values<1indicate a smaller run time with EAS-cluster. Furthermore, we report the total
run time for solution inference per instance astinf . For EAS-cluster and EAS-basic, this includes
the total run time with the active search and solution generation using POMO’s greedy policy for all
λvalues, while only the latter is incorporated for NoEAS which lacks active search. For each of the
POMO-based methods, inference times are consistent among allBinstances for fixedn. For LGA,
this includes the solution generation and training of the supervised learning model which happens
during inference.
We also report the number of solutionsQr generated at the Pareto Front by each method. Note
that this number is equal for all POMO-based models (101). Lastly, we report the average number
13
of feasible realizationsR f out of the totalR= 500for the solution constructed from the greedy
policy for eachn. Table 1 compares the result of EAS-cluster with the three baselines. Additional
statistics on the percentage increase in hyper-volume are reported in Table B.4 in Appendix B.
nMetric EAS-cluster EAS-basic NoEAS LGA
50Z(avg. ratio) 0 -0.02% 8.14% 327.87%
tfav (ratio) 1 0.44 −− −−
tinf (mins) 49 58 42 ≈0.64
Qr (Nr.) 101 101 101 8
Rf (Nr./500) 474 494 494 426
100Z 0 -0.28% 6.34% 547.74%
tfav 1 0.43 −− −−
tinf 90 105 78 ≈0.64
Qr 101 101 101 10
Rf 438 443 447 380
200Z 0 -0.51% 4.73% 1,120.21%
tfav 1 0.40 −− −−
tinf 164 195 143 ≈0.64
Qr 101 101 101 13
Rf 422 430 410 257
Table 1: Results EAS-cluster compared to EAS-basic on 20 different multi-objective C-VRPTW instances with
stochastic travel timesTfor each instance sizen.
For EAS-cluster, 7, 12 and 21 minutes per instance were spent on the EAS alone for the given
values ofn. For all values ofn(-0.02%,-0.28% and -0.51%), EAS-cluster results in a slightly worse
Pareto Front than EAS-basic as given by values ofZclose to zeros. This slight deterioration could
be due to the bias imposed by the evaluation on the few scenarios inW. To emphasize on the
distribution of the value ofZamong theB= 20instances, we provide Figure A.3 in Appendix A.
EAS-basic incurs a larger computational during the active search, consuming more than twice the
run time of EAS-cluster for all instances as result of the larger number of evaluations on scenarios
sampled fromW. This givestf av ratios of 0.44, 0.43 and 0.40 for the corresponding values of
n, despite EAS-cluster incurring more than twice the evaluations of EAS-basic (25 to 10) during
the 2,500 retraining steps. The resulting run times for EAS-basic are 58, 105 and 195 minutes
per instance compared to EAS-cluster’s 49, 90 and 164 minutes. Feasibility also slightly improves
with EAS-basic as the number of feasible evaluationsRf is 494 443 and 430 compared to EAS
cluster’s 474, 438 and 422 which could be attributed to the aforementioned bias. With these
results, we observe that the reduction in computation time due to EAS-cluster outweighs the small
deterioration in the Pareto Front hyper-volume and scenario feasibility.
The added value of active search, and EAS-cluster specifically, is shown in the significant im-
provement in hypervolume compared to NoEAS, withZvalues of 8.14%, 6.34% and 4.73% for the
givenn. For the sake of clarity, we provide the distribution of theZvalues in Figure A.4 in Ap-
pendix A. We see thatZdecreases asnincreases due to the increased difficulty of solving larger
14
problems. The run times of NoEAS only include the time for Pareto Front construction which is
similar for EAS-cluster, giving 42, 78 and 143 minutes. Solution feasibility is better forn= 50and
100, withR f = 494and 447 scenarios. However, forn= 200,R f decreases to 410. This could
be possibly due to the more pronounced effect of stochasticity in larger instances that can not be
easily treated by the original embeddingω. In fact,Rf decreases asnincreases for all methods as it
becomes increasingly difficult for a given solution to meet all the time windows of thencustomers.
Finally, we considerLGA. Since the existing implementation we found makes use of multi-
threading, it was difficult to accurately estimate the run time per instance, which we observed to
be less than a minute. However, LGA gives significantly inferior solutions compared to EAS-cluster
as given byZvalues of 327.87%, 547.74% and 1,120.21%. This can largely be attributed to the
methods inability to incorporate information on time-windows in the decision tree’s leaves through
simple customer orderings, thus struggling to find quality feasible solutions. A prominent advantage
of POMO-based models, on the other hand, is their ability to learn complex CO problems which
can be easily configured in the model’s environment and adequately processed by the encoder. LGA
is also unable to find as many solutions as POMO-based methods on the Pareto Front with 8, 10
and 13 solutions on average with respect to the 101 of the POMO-based models. Furthermore, since
these solution do not correspond to a specific balance of objectivesfk(.), it is difficult to verify their
diversity for different decision-making criteria. In contrast, POMO-based methods can provide such
diversity throughλparameters to balance the objectivesfk(.).
For a clear comparison of the resulting Pareto Front of all the methods, we refer to Figure A.5
in Appendix A. The figure compares the Pareto Front from EAS-cluster with each of the baselines
for one of the test instances of size 200. The comparison with EAS-basic in Figure A.5a shows that
the Pareto Fronts are fairly close, while the comparison with NoEAS in Figure A.5b shows a more
prominent difference especially when preferences are more oriented towards minimizing travel-times.
Lastly, the comparison with LGA in Figure A.5c demonstrates the inferiority of LGA’s Pareto Front
given its inability to accurately encode the problem’s parameters.
5.3. Ablation Studies
To study the ability of our method to deliver improved results and generalize to settings with
different distributions, we propose two sets of experiments. In the first set of experiments, we
combine our method with Monte Carlo Simulation. This is in line with the recommendations in
Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022) who state that Monte Carlo Simulation may improve over a greedy
policy. In the second set of experiments, we apply our method to solve a series of instances from a
different distribution with more variable travel times.
15
5.3.1. Monte Carlo Simulation
With the final embeddingω∗, Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022) use Monte Carlo simulation to evaluate
the different actions at every step of the solution generation, i.e. node visit. More precisely, at each
step, the top 5 recommended actions are evaluated by applying them in the succeeding step and
completing each of the 5 solution trajectories using the trained model’s policy. For each step, the
process is repeated for a fixed number of runsmsr and the average is taken to determine the best
action in the next step.
We make use of the same Monte Carlo simulation technique. There are some adjustments,
however, we ought to incorporate in the application of the Monte Carlo Simulation for VRP. Firstly,
Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022) consider a large number of simulation runsmsr - going up to 100s - for
each problem instance. This results in long running times per solution as demonstrated by their
numerical experiments with instances of size 200 going up to 48 minutes. Since we repeatedly have
to apply this procedure for several realizations ofλas each realization ofλinvokes a different
solution, we consider a smaller valuemsr = 10so that the total run time per instance falls within
the same order of magnitude of around 1 hour. Furthermore, we limit the number of sampledλ
values to 11 instead of 101.
Unlike the orienteering problem in Schmitt-Ulms et al. (2022), it is not possible to realize the
stochastic travel times after taking a step since repeated visits to the depot in VRP would then
imply that we can travel back in time. As such, the travel time realization we make after taking
a decision concerns the expected value of the travel time, while stochasticity is incorporated in
future decisions by the Monte Carlo runs. To impose feasibility constraints we require that the
decisions considered at each step are feasible for at least half of themsr = 10runs, otherwise they
are discarded. We require that solutions are only feasible50%of the time. Similar to the greedy
policy, we evaluate the resulting solution on a sample ofR= 500realizations and use the average
to estimate the objective values for givenλat the Pareto Front.
We compare the performance of the Monte Carlo approach to the greedy policy of EAS-cluster
from Section 5.2 in Table 2. Additional statistics on the percentage increase in hyper-volume are
reported in Table B.5 in Appendix B. Due to the expensive evaluation, we only considern=50 and
100. The reportedtinf times also include the run times for active search which is identical for both
methods as they used the same embedding.
16
nMetric EAS-cluster (Monte Carlo Simulation) EAS-cluster (Greedy)
50Z(avg. ratio) 0 0.33%
tinf (mins) 17 49
Qr (Nr.) 11 101
Rf (Nr./500) 489 474
100Z 0 -1.26%
tinf 37 90
Qr 11 101
Rf 470 438
Table 2: Results of EAS-cluster with Monte Carlo Simulation compared to greedy policy for each instance sizen.
The results generally imply that monte carlo simulation is of limited added value to multi-
objective optimization. While a marginal improvement of 0.33% is observed forn= 50, a deterio-
ration of 1.26% is observed forn= 100compared to using the greedy policy. The average run time
per instance as given bytinf is slightly less than a third of the greedy policy’s run time, with Monte
Carlo simulation requiring on average 17 and 37 minutes per instance forn= 50and 100. Yet, the
number of solutions on the Pareto Front generated from the greedy policy is 10 times as much.
Nonetheless, the Monte Carlo simulation slightly improves the number of feasible realizations
from 474 to 489 and from 438 to 470 forn=50 and 100. This could be attributed to the repetitive
evaluations in the Monte Carlo runs that require that a node visit be feasible for at least half the
msr = 10for it to be considered in the solution. As a result, a stronger feasibility requirement is
imposed compared to the greedy policy and more scenarios are satisfied by the resulting solution.
For cases where feasibility is crucial, one might still resort to using Monte Carlo Simulation rather
than a greedy policy.
5.3.2. Travel Time Distribution
In this section, we study the performance of our retrained model EAS-cluster on a dataset with
a different travel time distribution. We refrain from conducting an active search and simply run the
greedy policy on the new dataset to test model generalization. For the new dataset, we consider
standard deviationE[t ij]×0.4which is twice as variable as the travel times considered in Section
5.2.
As a benchmark, we consider NoEAS again. The rationale being that if the difference ofZis still
positive, then the model with updated embeddingω∗ generalizes well to a reasonable extent beyond
a model where no retraining is involved. We consider the greedy policy withQr = 101solutions
again. Since solution inference timestinf and number of Pareto Front pointsQr are identical, we
only reportZandR f in Table 3. Additional statistics on the percentage increase in hyper-volume
are reported in Table B.6 in Appendix B.
17
nMetric EAS-cluster (Greedy) NoEAS
50Z(avg. ratio) 0 8.39%
Rf (Nr./500) 448 480
100Z 0 6.56%
Rf 391 413
200Z 0 4.35%
Rf 334 340
Table 3: Results of EAS-cluster with greedy policy compared to NoEAS and more variable travel times for each
instance sizen.
The results are largely in line with those in Section 5.2. EAS-cluster improves the hyper-
volume by 8.39%, 6.56% and 4.35% on average forn= 50,100 and 200. While the performance of
EAS-cluster may deteriorate slightly in a more variable dataset, it still outperforms NoEAS whose
embeddingω, is significantly ‘out-of-tune’ with the more variable travel timesT. NoEAS, however,
provides more feasible solutions, givingRf =480, 413 and 340 solutions compared to EAS-cluster’s
448, 391 and 334 for givenn. This could be explained by the increased bias of cluster evaluations in
a different dataset, although the difference inRf values decreases with largerndue to the increased
difficulty of solving larger instances as explained in Section 5.2.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we provided an end-to-end method to solve a multi-objective stochastic C-
VRPTW. We specifically considered stochastic travel times and minimized total travel distance
and make-span. Our model is based on a variant of POMO that is first trained on determinis-
tic multi-objective instance and then retrained through an active search to account for travel time
stochasticity. The model could not only be configured to treat a variety of routing problems through
its flexible environment, but also account for more different objectives. The end-to-end mechanism
of the model not only simplifies solution generation, but is also invariant of other external assump-
tions on the model environment and the action space.
We provide a training mechanism for the model and enhance it using a clustering algorithm
that speeds up evaluations during active search and run time as a result. Our results show that our
model is very close in performance compared to a baseline employing standard active search from
the literature while being faster. It also significantly outperformed another POMO baseline that
disregards stochasticity as well as a common learning-based method for VRP from the literature,
resulting in more dominant Pareto Fronts.
Our model is able to generate as many solutions as desired for any set of preferences and in
reasonable run times. Its greedy policy is also sufficient to generate good results, reducing the need
for sampling policies often associated with POMO-based models. It also generalizes well to other
instances with different distribution than the one encountered during active search. Nonetheless, it
18
often results in less feasible solutions compared to the considered baseline, possibly due to the bias
induced by the clustered sample of scenarios.
Future research should focus more on synchronizing multi-objective training with active search
and the derivation of superior clustering techniques by which the associated model bias could be
overcome.
References
Abouelrous, A., Gabor, A. F., & Zhang, Y. (2022). Optimizing the inventory and fulfillment of
an omnichannel retailer: a stochastic approach with scenario clustering.Computers & Industrial
Engineering,173, 108723.
Accorsi, L., Lodi, A., & Vigo, D. (2022). Guidelines for the computational testing of machine
learning approaches to vehicle routing problems.Operations Research Letters,50, 229–234.
Achamrah, F. E. (2024). Leveraging transfer learning in deep reinforcement learning for solving
combinatorial optimization problems under uncertainty.IEEE Access, .
AMD (2025). Server processor specifications. URL:https://www.amd.com/en/products/
specifications/server-processor.htmlaccessed: 26-02-2025.
Bayliss, C. (2021). Machine learning based simulation optimisation for urban routing problems.
Applied Soft Computing,105, 107269.
Bengio, Y., Lodi, A., & Prouvost, A. (2021). Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: a
methodological tour d’horizon.European Journal of Operational Research,290, 405–421.
Chen, J., Wang, J., Zhang, Z., Cao, Z., Ye, T., & Chen, S. (2023). Efficient meta neural heuristic for
multi-objective combinatorial optimization.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
36, 56825–56837.
Deng, J., Wang, J., Wang, X., Cai, Y., & Liu, P. (2024). Multi-task multi-objective evolutionary
search based on deep reinforcement learning for multi-objective vehicle routing problems with
time windows.Symmetry,16, 1030.
Giuffrida, N., Fajardo-Calderin, J., Masegosa, A. D., Werner, F., Steudter, M., & Pilla, F. (2022).
Optimization and machine learning applied to last-mile logistics: A review.Sustainability,14,
5329.
Horvitz, E. J. (2013). Reasoning about beliefs and actions under computational resource constraints.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1304.2759, .
19
Iklassov, Z., Sobirov, I., Solozabal, R., & Takáč, M. (2024). Reinforcement learning for solving
stochastic vehicle routing problem. InAsian Conference on Machine Learning(pp. 502–517).
PMLR.
Intel (2025). Intel®xeon®platinum 8360y processor. URL:
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/sku/212459/
intel-xeon-platinum-8360y-processor-54m-cache-2-40-ghz/specifications.htmlac-
cessed: 26-02-2025.
Jia, Z., Dong, Z., Yin, M., & He, S. (). How robust reinforcement learning enables courier-friendly
route planning for last-mile delivery? InICML 2025 Workshop on Programmatic Representations
for Agent Learning.
Joe, W., & Lau, H. C. (2020). Deep reinforcement learning approach to solve dynamic vehicle
routing problem with stochastic customers. InProceedings of the international conference on
automated planning and scheduling(pp. 394–402). volume 30.
Kalyanmoy, D. (2002). A fast and elitist multi-objective genetic algorithm: Nsga-ii.IEEE Trans.
on Evolutionary Computation,6, 182–197.
Kool, W., Van Hoof, H., & Welling, M. (2018). Attention, learn to solve routing problems!arXiv
preprint arXiv:1803.08475, .
Kwon, Y.-D., Choo, J., Kim, B., Yoon, I., Gwon, Y., & Min, S. (2020). POMO: Policy optimization
with multiple optima for reinforcement learning.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems,33, 21188–21198.
Lin, X., Yang, Z., & Zhang, Q. (2022). Pareto set learning for neural multi-objective combinatorial
optimization.arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15386, .
Mazyavkina, N., Sviridov, S., Ivanov, S., & Burnaev, E. (2021). Reinforcement learning for combi-
natorial optimization: A survey.Computers & Operations Research,134, 105400.
Ngatchou, P., Zarei, A., & El-Sharkawi, A. (2005). Pareto multi objective optimization. InPro-
ceedings of the 13th international conference on, intelligent systems application to power systems
(pp. 84–91). IEEE.
Niu, Y., Kong, D., Wen, R., Cao, Z., & Xiao, J. (2021). An improved learnable evolution model
for solving multi-objective vehicle routing problem with stochastic demand.Knowledge-Based
Systems,230, 107378.
20
Niu, Y., Xu, C., Liao, S., Zhang, S., & Xiao, J. (2024). Multi-objective location-routing optimization
based on machine learning for green municipal waste management.Waste Management,181,
157–167.
Nvidia (2025). NVIDIA A100 tensor core GPU. URL:https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/
data-center/a100/accessed: 26-02-2025.
d O Costa, P. R., Rhuggenaath, J., Zhang, Y., & Akcay, A. (2020). Learning 2-opt heuristics for
the traveling salesman problem via deep reinforcement learning. InAsian conference on machine
learning(pp. 465–480). PMLR.
Peng, Y., Gao, S. H., Yu, D., Xiao, Y. P., & Luo, Y. J. (2023). Multi-objective optimization for
multimodal transportation routing problem with stochastic transportation time based on data-
driven approaches.RAIRO-Operations Research,57, 1745–1765.
Sarker, A., Shen, H., & Kowsari, K. (2020). A data-driven reinforcement learning based multi-
objective route recommendation system. In2020 IEEE 17th international conference on mobile
ad hoc and sensor systems (mass)(pp. 103–111). IEEE.
Schmitt-Ulms, F., Hottung, A., Sellmann, M., & Tierney, K. (2022). Learning to solve a stochastic
orienteering problem with time windows. InInternational Conference on Learning and Intelligent
Optimization(pp. 108–122). Springer.
Son, J., Kim, M., Choi, S., Kim, H., & Park, J. (2024). Equity-transformer: Solving np-hard min-
max routing problems as sequential generation with equity context. InProceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence(pp. 20265–20273). volume 38.
Tozer, B., Mazzuchi, T., & Sarkani, S. (2017). Many-objective stochastic path finding using rein-
forcement learning.Expert Systems with Applications,72, 371–382.
Veličković, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Lio, P., & Bengio, Y. (2017). Graph
attention networks.arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, .
Wang, F., He, Q., & Li, S. (2024). Solving combinatorial optimization problems with deep neural
network: A survey.Tsinghua Science and Technology,29, 1266–1282.
Wang, Z., Yao, S., Li, G., & Zhang, Q. (2023). Multiobjective combinatorial optimization using a
single deep reinforcement learning model.IEEE transactions on cybernetics,54, 1984–1996.
Williams, R. J. (1992). Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
ment learning.Machine learning,8, 229–256.
21
Wu, R., Wang, R., Hao, J., Wu, Q., Wang, P., & Niyato, D. (2024). Multiobjective vehicle routing
optimization with time windows: A hybrid approach using deep reinforcement learning and nsga-
ii.IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, .
Yao, Y., Peng, Z., Xiao, B., & Guan, J. (2017). An efficient learning-based approach to multi-
objective route planning in a smart city. In2017 IEEE International Conference on Communi-
cations (ICC)(pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Zhang, Q., & Li, H. (2007). Moea/d: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on decompo-
sition.IEEE Transactions on evolutionary computation,11, 712–731.
Zhang, T., Cheng, J., & Zou, Y. (2024). Multimodal transportation routing optimization based on
multi-objective q-learning under time uncertainty.Complex & Intelligent Systems,10, 3133–3152.
Zhang, Z., Liu, H., Zhou, M., & Wang, J. (2021). Solving dynamic traveling salesman problems
with deep reinforcement learning.IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
34, 2119–2132.
Zhou, C., Ma, J., Douge, L., Chew, E. P., & Lee, L. H. (2023). Reinforcement learning-based
approach for dynamic vehicle routing problem with stochastic demand.Computers & Industrial
Engineering,182, 109443.
22
Appendix A. Figures
(a)n= 50
(b)n= 100
 (c)n= 200
Figure A.3: Histogram ofZvalues of EAS-cluster against EAS-basic.
23
(a)n= 50
(b)n= 100
 (c)n= 200
Figure A.4: Histogram ofZvalues of EAS-cluster against NoEAS
24
(a) EAS-cluster vs. EAS-basic
(b) EAS-cluster vs. No EAS
 (c) EAS-cluster vs. LGA
Figure A.5: Plots comparing the Pareto Front generated by EAS-cluster against other methods for one of the instances
of size 200.
Appendix B. Hyper-volume Additional Statistics
In this section, we report additional statistics on the percentage increase in hyper-volume for
our experiments. Our statistics concern the quantity:
[HV(P b)EAS−cluster −HV(P b)l]×100
HV(P b)l
(B.1)
for which the mean across allBinstances represents the metricZused in Section 5.2. In addition
to the mean, we report the standard deviation, the min and max values in the following Tables.
Table B.4 concerns results in Table 1, Table B.5 concerns results in Table 2 and Table B.6 concerns
results in Table 3.
25
nMetric EAS-basic NoEAS LGA
50St Dev 3.72% 6.4% 97.23%
Max 7.54% 25.23% 605.76%
Min -6.98% -3.94% 184.69%
100St Dev 3.97 % 4.63 % 86.32%
Max 10.16 % 15.8 % 663.51 %
Min -5.63 % 0.57 % 380.77 %
200St Dev 2.37 % 3.34 % 307.28 %
Max 5.44 % 11.15 % 2092.01 %
Min -5.0 % -0.6 % 758.97 %
Table B.4: Statistics on percentage increase in hyper-volume of EAS-cluster relative to baseline for the experiments
reported in Table 1
nMetric EAS-cluster (Greedy)
50St Dev 2.4 %
Max 6.86 %
Min -3.87 %
100St Dev 1.95 %
Max 3.47 %
Min -5.73 %
Table B.5: Statistics on percentage increase in hyper-volume of EAS-cluster with Monte Carlo Simulation relative to
Greedy policy for the experiments reported in Table 2
nMetric No-EAS
50St Dev 6.57 %
Max 25.7 %
Min -2.71 %
100St Dev 4.73 %
Max 16.66 %
Min 0.3 %
200St Dev 3.53 %
Max 10.99 %
Min -0.87 %
Table B.6: Statistics on percentage increase in hyper-volume of EAS-cluster relative to NoEAS for the experiments
reported in Table 3 with more variable travel times.
26