1 
 
Toward a benchmark for CTR prediction in online advertising: 
datasets, evaluation protocols and perspectives  
Shan Gao1, Yanwu Yang1 
1School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 43004, China, 
{gaoshan.isec, yangyanwu.isec}@gmail.com 
 
Abstract: Click-through rate (CTR) prediction aims to infer the probability that users will click 
on advertisements, which is crucial for platforms to plan and optimize the expected revenues in 
online advertising. Substantial research efforts have been invested to develop a variety of  CTR 
prediction models. However, there remains a lack of standardized benchmark s for validating and 
comparing the performance of CTR prediction models, especially in the situation with numerous 
models developed by researchers and practitioners. This research designs a unified architecture of 
CTR prediction benchmark (Bench-CTR) platform that offers flexible interfaces with datasets and 
components of a wide range of CTR prediction models. Moreover, we construct a comprehensive 
system of evaluation protocols encompassing real -world and synthetic datasets, a taxonomy of 
metrics, standardized procedures and experimental guidelines for calibrating the performance of 
CTR prediction models . Furthermore, we implement the proposed benchmark platform and 
conduct a comparative study to evaluate a wide range of state -of-the-art models from traditional 
multivariate statistical to modern large language model (LLM)-based approaches on three public 
datasets and two synthetic datasets. Experimental results reveal that, (1) high-order models largely 
outperform low-order models, though such advantage varies in terms of metrics and on different 
datasets; (2) LLM-based models demonstrate a remarkable data efficiency, i.e., achieving the 
comparable performance to other models while using only 2% of the training data; (3) the 
performance of CTR prediction models has achieved significant improvements from 2015 to 2016, 
then reache d a stage with slow progress, which is consistent across various datasets. This 
benchmark is expected to facilitate model development and evaluation and enhance practitioners’ 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms of models in the area of CTR pre diction. Code is 
available at https://github.com/NuriaNinja/Bench-CTR.  
Keywords: benchmarking framework, CTR prediction, online advertising, evaluation protocol 
 
Gao, Shan and Yang, Yanwu, (2025). Toward a benchmark for CTR prediction in online advertising: 
datasets, evaluation protocols and perspectives. Electronic Commerce Research , forthcoming. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10660-025-10061-9. 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Online advertising revenue in the United States grew by 60.9% in 2023 compared to 2020, 
increasing from $139.8 billion to $225 billion (Statista, 2024). The online advertising market size 
is estimated at $257.97 billion in 2024 and is expected to reach $431.76 billion by 2029, growing 
at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 10.85% during the forecast period from 2024 to 
2029 (Mordor Intelligence, 2024). Click-through rate (CTR) prediction is essential for advertisers 
to optimize their decisions and maximize the expected revenues from online advertising 
campaigns. 
In the literature , researchers have developed  plenty of  CTR prediction models in the  last 
decade, including multivariate statistical models  (e.g., Chang et al., 2010; Kumar et al., 2015 ), 
tree-based models (e.g., Friedman, 2001; Chen & Guestrin, 2016), factorization machines (FMs)-
based models (e.g., Rendle, 2010; Juan et al., 2016; Pan et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2021), deep learning 
models (e.g., Qu et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2020; Niu & Hou, 2020; Chen et al., 2022b; Zhai et al., 
2023), ensemble models (e.g., Cheng et al., 2016; Lian et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2020; Wang et 
al., 2023b; Liu et al., 2024 ), and large language model (LLM) -based models (e.g., Yang et al., 
2023a; Fu et al., 2023; Geng et al., 2024). However, the impressive number of models and a variety 
of evaluation procedures and metrics have made rigorous model evaluation quite challenging. In 
particular, studies employing non-uniform and incompatible procedures lead to non-reproducible, 
inconsistent or even opposing results (Zhu et al., 2021; Yang & Zhai, 2022), and in turn limit the 
credibility of CTR prediction models. The inherent sparsity and inadequate field documentation in 
public datasets hinder their effectiveness for research. Moreover, the disparate selection of 
evaluation metrics among studies limits the comparability of results. Thus, there lacks a 
standardized benchmark for validating and comparing the performance of CTR prediction models, 
along with synthetic data generation and metric s selection strategies,  which motivates us to 
develop a comprehensive benchmark for CTR prediction in online advertising. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is one of the first research efforts in this direction.  
This research has three objectives.  First, we aim to design a unified architecture of CTR 
prediction benchmark (Bench -CTR) platform that offers flexible interfaces with datasets and 
components of a wide range of CTR prediction models. Second, we intend to construct a 
comprehensive system of evaluation protocols encompassing real-world and synthetic datasets, a 
taxonomy of metrics, standardized procedures and experimental guidelines for calibrating the 
3 
 
performance of CTR prediction models. Third, our goal is to implement Bench-CTR and conduct 
a comparative study to evaluate a wide range of state -of-the-art models from traditional 
multivariate statistical to modern LLM-based approaches.  
This research complements recent studies on evaluation frameworks ( Zhu et al., 2021) and 
literature reviews (Yang & Zhai, 2022) in this area. Specifically, Zhu et al. (2021) focused on an 
evaluation environment with two public datasets (i.e., Criteo and Avazu), two metrics (i.e., AUC 
and Logloss) and basic toolkits (i.e., data splitting and preprocessing, hyper-parameters tuning and 
interfaces with CTR prediction models ); and Yang and Zhai (2022) presented a state -of-the-art 
literature review on CTR prediction research focusing on modeling frameworks and techniques. 
In t his research , we  propose a  benchmark platform for CTR prediction (Bench-CTR) to 
facilitate fair and consistent comparisons among various models in the context of online 
advertising. First  of all , we present a unified architecture of CTR prediction benchmark  with 
essential interfaces  with datasets and modeling components . Moreover, we provide a 
comprehensive system of evaluation protocols including synthetic data generation and real-world 
datasets publically available and widely used in the literature, a multi-level taxonomy of evaluation 
metrics, evaluation procedures and experimental guidelines for performance assessment of CTR 
prediction models. Furthermore, we provide implementation details of the proposed benchmark 
platform and synthetic data generation algorithms, and conduct a comparative study to validate 15 
CTR prediction models in terms of 11 metrics on three public and two synthetic datasets. Results 
reveal that, (1) high -order models largely outperform low -order models, though such advantage 
varies in terms of metrics and on different datasets; (2) LLM -based models demonstrate a 
remarkable data efficiency, i.e., achieving comparable performance to other models while using 
only 2% of the training data; (3) the performance of CTR prediction models has achieved 
significant improvements from 2015 to 2016, then reache d a stage with slow progress in the past 
decade, which is consistent across various datasets. 
The contributions of this research can be summarized as follows. First, we propose a unified 
and extensible benchmark (Bench-CTR) platform that integrates flexible interfaces with datasets 
and state-of-the-art models for CTR prediction in the context of online advertising . Second, we 
establish a comprehensive system of evaluation protocols that encompasses a collection of public 
and synthetic datasets, a taxonomy of metrics, standardized procedures and guidelines. Third, we 
implement and employ Bench-CTR to perform a comparative study validating a wide range  of 
4 
 
CTR prediction models. 
The remainder of this paper is organized  as follows. Section 2 reviews related work  on 
benchmarking studies . Section 3 presents a unified architecture of Bench-CTR and related 
interfaces and components . Section 4  gives the CTR prediction modeling process. Section 5 
describes a comprehensive system of evaluation protocols . Section 6 provides implementation 
details of Bench-CTR and reports a comparative study conducted on Bench-CTR. In Section 7, we 
discuss main challenges and future directions in this area, and conclude the paper in Section 8. 
2. Related work 
Benchmarks serve as standard tools for evaluating and comparing competing systems or 
components in the scientific community. Benchmarking studies can be categorized into three main 
groups, including evaluation frameworks, comparative studies, and benchmarking datasets. For 
evaluation frameworks, MT -bench (multi-turn benchmark ) (Zheng et al., 2023) is designed to 
evaluate large language models ’ multi-turn conversation and instruction -following capabilities , 
RecBole (Zhao et al., 2021) and Elliot (Anelli et al., 2021) focus on assessing the performance 
recommendation models . In the branch of comparative studies,  researchers have conducted  
evaluations, including performance comparison s between  predictive models and ChatGPT 
(Caruccio et al., 2024), as well as assessments of fine-tuned pretrained language models (Doimo 
et al., 2024 ). In the field of benchmarking datasets, CIFAR-10 (Canadian institute for advanced 
research) (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) in computer vision , 
ARC (AI2 reasoning challenge) (Clark et al., 2018), HellaSwag (harder endings, longer contexts, 
and low-shot activities for situations with adversarial generations ) (Zellers et al., 2019 ), GLUE 
(general language understanding evaluation) and SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019a; 2019b) in 
natural languages provide standardized data for model evaluation.  
Although abundant benchmarking studies have been reported in various fields as discussed 
above, to the best of our knowledge, there is little research on developing benchmarking and 
comparative studies in the area of CTR prediction, with the exception of Zhu et al. (2021) . Our 
work differs from Zhu et al. (2021) in the following key aspects. This research proposes a unified 
architecture of CTR prediction benchmark (Bench-CTR) platform, which offers flexible interfaces 
with datasets and components of a wide range of CTR prediction models from traditional 
multivariate statistical to modern large language model (LLM)-based approaches, while Zhu et al. 
5 
 
(2021) narrowly focused on a simplified evaluation environment with two public datasets (i.e., 
Criteo and Avazu), two metrics (i.e., AUC and Logloss) and basic toolkits (i.e., data splitting and 
preprocessing, hyper-parameters tuning and interfaces with CTR prediction models). Moreover, 
we provide a comprehensive system of evaluation protocols, encompassing two synthetic data 
generation algorithms and three public datasets (i.e., Criteo, Avazu, and AntM 2C), a multi-level 
taxonomy of twenty evaluation metrics used in the literature on CTR prediction, and the evaluation 
procedure including dataset selection, validation methods, hyper -parameter settings, metric 
selection, model comparison, sensitivity analysis and ablation studies.  
Besides, this research fundamentally differs from Yang and Zhai (2022) in the following key 
aspects. We propose a unified architecture of CTR prediction benchmark (Bench -CTR) platform 
embodying standardized evaluation protocols and fle xible interfaces with datasets and modeling 
components supporting experimental studies and evaluation of CTR prediction models, while 
Yang and Zhai (2022) presented a state -of-the-art literature review on CTR prediction research 
focusing on modeling framew orks and techniques. Moreover, we conduct a comparative study 
covering state -of-the-art models across a wide range from traditional multivariate statistical 
models, tree -based models, factorization machines (FMs)-based models, deep neural network 
(DNN)-based models, convolutional neural network (CNN)-based models, recurrent neural 
network (RNN)-based models, graph neural network (GNN)-based models, transformer -based 
models, ensemble models, to modern LLM-based models. 
3. The Bench-CTR architecture 
The CTR prediction problem in online advertising pertains to estimating the likelihood that a user 
will click on an advertisement. The mathematical definition of the CTR prediction problem is 
given as 𝑝(𝑢, 𝑎) = 𝑓(𝜑(𝑢, 𝑎; 𝜃)) , where 𝑝(𝑢, 𝑎)  is the probability that a user will click on an 
advertisement, 𝑢 is user, 𝑎 is an advertisement, 𝜑(𝑢, 𝑎; 𝜃) is a function processing the information 
of user and advertisement, 𝜃 represents the parameters of this function, and 𝑓 is a function that 
maps the output of 𝜑(𝑢, 𝑎; 𝜃) to a probability value which is between 0 and 1.  
6 
 
 
Figure 1. The architecture of Bench-CTR platform 
In this research, w e propose a unified architecture of CTR prediction benchmark (Bench -
CTR) platform, as shown in Figure 1.  Specifically, the architecture of Bench -CTR platform 
consists of three major components: datasets handler, CTR modeling suites, and evaluation system. 
The datasets handler provides synthetic data generation algorithms to produce synthetic datasets 
and an interface with public datasets (e.g., Criteo and Avazu) widely used in the extant literature. 
Public datasets ensure the comparability of experimental results reported in prior studies, while 
synthetic datasets offer the opportunities of controlling experimental processes.  The d ataset 

7 
 
interface also incorporates data preparation and feature engineering  functions. For the CTR 
modeling suites, Bench-CTR provides a set of modeling interfaces supporting various embedding, 
representation learning and the click probability prediction  methods, by encapsulating source 
codes offered in prior studies and publically available third-party repositories. In other words, for 
each CTR prediction model, we decompose its modeling structure  by modularizing key 
components (e.g., embedding and representation learning layers), and design an interface for each 
type of modules in Bench -CTR. The evaluation system  contains a comprehensive protocol 
including validation methods, hyper-parameter settings, multi-level metrics, evaluation procedure 
and guidelines for performance comparison, sensitivity analysis and ablation studies. 
Essentially, Bench-CTR consolidates the CTR prediction modeling process and a 
comprehensive system of evaluation protocols. The former is detailed in Section 4, and the latter 
is presented in Section 5. 
4. The CTR prediction modeling process 
Generally, the CTR prediction modeling process consists of five components, including data 
preparation, feature engineering, embedding, representation learning, and prediction, as shown in 
the bottom left of Figure 1.  
4.1 Data preparation 
Data preparation is a process that involves data quality assessment and preprocessing for 
consistency checking and data cleaning to ensure data quality for CTR prediction. 
Data quality assessment provides information about various aspects of the dataset, such as 
data reliability, completeness and distribution, which can be conducted through exploratory data 
analysis (EDA) techniques, including box plots and correlation matrices. 
Data preprocessing encompasses a series of operations, including duplicate sample removal, 
missing values imputation, column selection, data sampling , imbalance handling of label 
distributions (Zhang et al., 2020 ), and replacing unknown or out -of-vocabulary values with 
standardized tokens (e.g., <unknown> and OOV) (Guo et al., 2022a; Li et al., 2024b; Sang et al., 
2024).  
4.2 Feature engineering 
Feature engineering primarily includes transforming existing features into new ones and designing 
8 
 
feature interaction mechanisms in the extant research on CTR prediction.  
(1) Feature transformation 
 Discretization: numerical and categorical features can be transformed into discrete values 
by using equal-width and equal-frequency binning methods to simplify features  and accelerate 
training process.  
 Scaling and normalization: feature values can be rescaled to a specified range through min-
max scaling (Wang et al., 2022a) and log transformation (Wang et al., 2017; Song et al., 2019) to 
reduce the impact of outliers and improve the model convergence. 
(2) Feature interaction  
 The f irst-order interaction : an individual feature independently influences the CTR 
prediction, as exemplified in logistic regression (LR) (Kumar et al., 2015). 
 The second-order interaction: the effect of one feature on the CTR prediction depends on 
another one, as embodied in factorization machines (FMs) (Rendle, 2010). 
 High-order interaction: the effect of one feature on the CTR prediction depends on two or 
more other ones, as described in deep learning models (e.g.,  Li et al., 2021a; Chen et al., 2022b; 
Zhai et al., 2023). 
4.3 Embedding 
Embedding transforms high-dimensional sparse inputs into low -dimensional dense vectors (Guo 
et al., 2017; Song et al., 2019), through the following techniques.  
(1) Categorical feature embedding uses one-hot or multi-hot encoding to handle categorical 
features (Zhou et al., 2018). 
(2) Numerical feature embedding uses a linear layer or an embedding table to encode scalar 
values. 
(3) Time-series feature embedding  uses transformation-based methods (e.g., Fourier 
transform and wavelet transform) or model-based methods (e.g., autoregressive model and hidden 
Markov model) to encode temporal features for the purpose of effectively capturing trends and 
patterns over time. 
(4) Text embedding uses Doc2vec (Xia et al., 2019) or language models (Wang et al., 2022a) 
to encode text features. 
(5) Image embedding uses method such as ResNet50 (Xia et al., 2019) and VGG16 (Li et 
9 
 
al., 2020b) to transform images into vectors that capture visual information. 
(6) Graph embedding  converts graph nodes or edges into vectors  capturing structural 
information, by using  method such as  DeepWalk and node2vec. In CTR prediction,  users and 
advertisements can be  represented as nodes  in a bipartite graph where  edges describe the  
interactions between users and advertisements (Jin et al., 2025; Zhai et al., 2025). 
4.4 Representation learning 
Representation learning is referred to learning data representations during the  model training 
process to  make underlying explanatory factors  more explicit and useful. In the literature , 
numerous models have been proposed to learn and utilize representations of users, advertisements 
and interactions effectively to improve CTR prediction . State-of-the-art CTR prediction models 
can be classified into six categories, including multivariate statistical models, tree -based models, 
FMs-based models, deep learning models, ensemble models , and LLM -based models , as 
summarized in Table 1. For details about CTR prediction modeling f rameworks, refer to the 
literature by Yang & Zhai (2022). In Table 1, deep learning models include DNN -based, CNN-
based, RNN -based, GNN -based and transformer -based models.  While not exhaustive, Table 1 
illustrates major categories of  representative models for CTR prediction in the context of online 
advertising. 
(1) Multivariate statistical models 
 Logistic regression (LR) (Kumar et al., 2015)  is a fundamental linear model widely used 
for CTR prediction, due to its simplicity and computational efficiency. 
 Degree-2 polynomial model (Poly2) (Chang et al., 2010) expands linear models to capture 
non-linear relationships and pairwise interactions  between features by assigning an independent 
parameter to each feature pair. 
(2) Tree-based models  
 Gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT) (Friedman, 2001) iteratively constructs an additive 
model, where each decision tree is trained to fit the negative gradients of the loss function of 
previously integrated trees. 
 eXtreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) (Chen & Guestrin, 2016) incorporates a sparsity-
aware algorithm for handling sparse data and a weighted quantile sketch algorithm for approximate 
tree learning, in order to prevent overfitting and improve the model performance. 
10 
 
(3) FMs-based models  
 Factorization machines (FMs) (Rendle, 2010)  efficiently capture pairwise feature 
interactions by factorizing associated parameters and are capable of generalizing to unseen feature 
combinations.  
 Field-aware factorization machines (FFMs) (Juan et al., 2016) are a variant of FMs , 
considering field information to enhance the model performance in CTR prediction. 
 Neural factorization machine (NFM) (He & Chua, 2017) integrates the second-order feature 
interactions modeling of FMs with the non -linearity of neural networks to capture high -order 
interactions. 
 Attentional factorization machine (AFM) (Xiao et al., 2017)  employs a neural attention 
network to learn the contributions of interactions through an attention-based pooling mechanism. 
 Field-weighted factorization machine (FwFM) (Pan et al., 2018)  captures feature 
interactions between features with fewer parameters compared to FFMs. 
 High-order attentive factorization machine (HoAFM) (Tao et al., 2020) explicitly encodes 
high-order feature interactions into representations , and employs a bit-wise attention mechanism 
to determine the importance of feature interactions. 
 Field-matrixed factorization machine (FmFM) (Sun et al., 2021)  describes pairwise 
interactions with matrices, and improves the inference efficiency through caching intermediate 
vectors. 
(4) Deep learning models 
DNN-based models  leverage multiple hidden  layers of neural networks  with non -linear 
transformations to learn high-order feature interactions implicitly. 
 Product-based neural network (PNN) (Qu et al., 2016) consists of three components, namely 
an embedding layer to learn distributed representations, a product layer to capture the second-order 
interactions between features and a set of fully connected layers to represent high-order 
interactions. 
 Feature importance and bilinear feature interaction network (FiBiNET) (Huang et al., 2019) 
employs a squeeze-excitation network (SENET) mechanism to dynamically learn the importance 
of features, and leverages a bilinear function to learn feature interactions. 
 Operation-aware neural networks (ONN) (Yang et al., 2020) learn various representations 
11 
 
for different operations  (e.g., product and convolution)  to improve the prediction through the 
operation-aware embedding, a feature extraction layer and multiple nonlinear layers.  
CNN-based models utilize convolutional and pooling operations to extract local patterns and 
capture interactions with neighboring features. 
 Convolutional click prediction model (CCPM) (Liu et al., 2015) uses convolutional neural 
networks to extract local-global features from an individual and sequential advertising impressions. 
 Density matrix-based convolutional neural network (DMCNN) (Niu & Hou, 2020)  
combines density matrices and convolutional neural network s to capture high-order feature 
interactions. 
 Hybrid CNN based attention with category prior module  (HCCM) (Chen et al., 2022b) 
combines fixed-CNN and trainable -CNN components  to model user s’ behaviors in CTR 
prediction. 
RNN-based models employ recurrent neural networks to learn dynamic representations and 
temporal patterns from users’ sequential behaviors. 
 Long short-term memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) is designed to address 
the limitation of recurrent neural networks  in handling long -term dependencies by designing a 
gating mechanism to control information flow , which consists of input gate, forget gate, output 
gate and cell state. 
 Deep interest evolution network (DIEN) (Zhou et al., 2019)  encompasses an interest 
extractor layer that utilizes an auxiliary loss function to capture temporal interests and an interest 
evolving layer that employs gated recurrent unit (GRU) with an attentional update gate (AUGRU) 
to capture interest evolving processes. 
GNN-based models capture feature interactions between nodes in a graph structure and learn 
representation through message aggregation and propagation. 
 Feature interaction graph neural networks (FiGNN) (Li et al., 2019) utilize a graph structure 
to represent multi-field features, where a node denotes a feature field and an edge denotes a feature 
interaction.  
 Causal-GNN (Zhai et al., 2023)  leverages causal inferences to capture high -order 
interactions in a feature graph and combines representations from user-user and ad -ad graphs to 
enhance CTR prediction. 
Transformer-based models  employ an attention mechanism  to capture long -range 
12 
 
dependencies and facilitate parallel processing of sequential data. 
 Automatic feature interaction learning (AutoInt) (Song et al., 2019)  uses a self-attention 
mechanism to explicitly learn high-order feature interactions. 
 Interpretable CTR prediction model with hierarchical attention (InterHAt) (Li et al., 2020c) 
employs a transformer with the multi-head self -attention to learn  the polysemy of feature 
interactions and a hierarchical attention structure  to learn the importance of different orders of 
features. 
 Attentive capsule network (ACN) (Li et al., 2021a)  uses transformers to capture feature 
interactions and capsule networks to extract users’ interests. 
(5) Ensemble models 
 Wide&Deep (Cheng et al., 2016) integrates wide linear models with deep neural networks 
to simultaneously achieve memorization and generalization. 
 Deep&Cross network (DCN) (Wang et al., 2017)  integrates capabilities of deep neural 
networks with a cross network architecture to learn bounded-degree feature interactions. 
 Factorization-machine based neural network (DeepFM) (Guo et al., 2017) employs a hybrid 
architecture integrating deep neural networks and factorization machines to capture low-order and 
high-order feature interactions. 
 eXtreme deep factorization machine (xDeepFM) (Lian et al., 2018) integrates compressed 
interaction network (CIN) with deep neural networks  in a unified framework  to capture feature 
interactions at the vector-wise level. 
 Ensemble trees and cascading forests ( ETCF) (Qiu et al., 2018)  integrates GBDT with 
multi-grained cascade forest (gcForest), where features are transformed with GBDT and then fed 
to gcForest to improve the model performance. 
 Deep learning framework distilled by GBDT (DeepGBM) (Ke et al., 2019) integrates deep 
neural networks with GBDT using specialized components to process categorical and numerical 
features. 
 Adaptive factorization network (AFN) (Cheng et al., 2020)  incorporates a log 
transformation with neural networks to  learns arbitrary-order cross features and related weights 
adaptively. 
 Feature selection and interaction aggregation layers on top of two multi-layer perceptron 
13 
 
(MLP) module networks (FinalMLP) (Mao et al., 2023) enhances two-stream MLP models with a 
feature gating layer and a bilinear interaction aggregation layer to improve CTR prediction. 
 Gated deep cross network (GDCN) (Wang et al., 2023b)  integrates a gated cross network 
(GCN) with DNN , where DNN and GCN are used to capture  implicit and explicit high -order 
interactions, respectively, through an information gate. 
 RLCP1 (Liu et al., 2024)  uses a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm to dynamically 
determine weights while combining results of multiple CTR prediction models. 
(6) LLM-based models 
 SODA 2(Yang et al., 2023a) integrates ChatGPT based on GPT-3.5 (Ouyang et al., 2022 ) 
with explainable artificial intelligence  techniques to improve CTR  prediction and optimize 
advertising strategies. 
 Unified framework for multi-domain CTR prediction (Uni-CTR) (Fu et al., 2023) employs 
a LLM to capture domain commonalities by extracting layer -wise representation  and domain-
specific networks to capture domain characteristics. 
 Behavior aggregated hierarchical encoding (BAHE) (Geng et al., 2024)  extracts 
representations of atomic behaviors by utilizing encoding techniques in a LLM (e.g., Qwen-1_8B3) 
to improve the computational efficiency. 
Table 1. Categories of representative CTR prediction models 
Categories Representative models References 
Multivariate statistical models LR Kumar et al. (2015) 
Poly2 Chang et al. (2010) 
Tree-based models GBDT Friedman (2001) 
XGBoost Chen & Guestrin (2016) 
FMs-based models FMs Rendle (2010) 
FFMs Juan et al. (2016) 
NFM He & Chua (2017) 
AFM Xiao et al. (2017) 
FwFM Pan et al. (2018) 
HoAFM Tao et al. (2020) 
                                            
1 It is referred to a reinforcement learning-based ensemble learning framework for CTR prediction. 
2 It is referred to a LLM-based advertising analysis framework for CTR prediction and advertising strategy optimization. 
3 https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen-1_8B (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
14 
 
FmFM Sun et al. (2021) 
Deep learning models DNN-based 
models 
PNN Qu et al. (2016) 
FiBiNET Huang et al. (2019) 
ONN Yang et al. (2020) 
CNN-based 
models 
CCPM Liu et al. (2015) 
DMCNN Niu & Hou (2020) 
HCCM Chen et al. (2022b) 
RNN-based 
models 
LSTM Hochreiter & Schmidhuber 
(1997) 
DIEN Zhou et al. (2019) 
GNN-based 
models 
FiGNN Li et al. (2019) 
Causal-GNN Zhai et al. (2023) 
Transformer-
based models 
AutoInt Song et al. (2019) 
InterHAt Li et al. (2020c) 
ACN Li et al. (2021a) 
Ensemble models Wide&Deep Cheng et al. (2016) 
DCN Wang et al. (2017) 
DeepFM Guo et al. (2017) 
xDeepFM Lian et al. (2018) 
ETCF Qiu et al. (2018) 
DeepGBM Ke et al. (2019) 
AFN Cheng et al. (2020) 
FinalMLP Mao et al. (2023) 
GDCN Wang et al. (2023b) 
RLCP Liu et al. (2024) 
LLM-based models SODA Yang et al. (2023a) 
Uni-CTR Fu et al. (2023) 
BAHE Geng et al. (2024) 
4.5 Prediction  
The predicted probability needs to be constrained to the range [0, 1], by using functions such as 
logistic and softmax. The logistic function is the most widely adopted by researchers (e.g., Huang 
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020c; Wang et al., 2022b; Zhai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c), which is 
defined as follows.  
𝜎(𝑥) =
1
1+𝑒−𝑥.     (1) 
An alternative method is softmax (Liu et al., 2015), which is defined as follows. 
15 
 
softmax(𝑥𝑖) =
𝑒𝑥𝑖
∑ 𝑒𝑥𝑗2
𝑗=1
,     (2) 
where 𝑖 indicates the class index, and 𝑗 is the summation index. 
5. A comprehensive system of evaluation protocols for CTR prediction 
In this section, we provide a comprehensive system of evaluation protocols for CTR prediction, as 
shown in the top of Figure 1, including public and synthetic datasets (Section 5.1), a multi-level 
taxonomy of metrics  (Section 5.2), evaluation procedures and experimental guidelines (Section 
5.3). 
5.1 Datasets  
In this section, w e introduce public datasets widely used in the literature on CTR prediction and 
synthetic datasets generation methods, which both are supported in Bench-CTR. Public datasets 
are collected from actual activities and advertising logs where a large number of features may be 
sparse, which requires manual feature engineering by domain experts  and in turn hampers the 
prediction. In contrast, synthetic datasets are created based on predefined rules or generative 
models, allowing researchers to conduct controllable experiments.  
5.1.1 Public datasets 
Public datasets are usually released by companies or institutions , which record user interactions 
with advertisements in real practices . In the following we introduce nine datasets that are most 
commonly adopted or recently released for CTR prediction evaluation. 
Criteo4. This dataset consists of a training set spanning 7 days and a test set spanning 1 day, 
which provides a total of 45.8 million instances with 13 numerical fields and 26 categorical fields. 
Avazu5. This dataset consists of a training set spanning 10 days and a test set spanning 1 day, 
which contains 40.4 million records across 24 fields, such as banner position, site ID, site category, 
device type, click, and others.  
AntM2C6. This multi-modal dataset was provided by the Alipay platform  in 2023, which 
includes 110 million impression -click samples across 37 field s, such as user ID, item ID, item 
content, and others. 
                                            
4 https://www.kaggle.com/c/criteo-display-ad-challenge (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
5 https://www.kaggle.com/c/avazu-ctr-prediction/data (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
6 https://www.atecup.cn/dataSetDetailOpen/1 (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
16 
 
KDD127. This collection of training instances was derived from session logs of Tenc ent’s 
proprietary search engine (i.e., soso.com), including query data and user information. Each record 
contains 12 fields such as UserID, AdID, Query, Depth, Position, Impression, and Click. 
iPinYou8. This dataset contains advertising logs from iPinYou’s proprietary demand-side 
platform (DSP) contain records of ad bidding, impressions, clicks, and conversions derived from 
real-world advertising campaigns. Each bidding line contains a unique bid ID that identifies an 
opportunity of ad impression and can be used to join impression and click logs. The landing page 
URL tracks users’ clicks after they interact with an ad. 
Avito 9 . This dataset was provided by t he 2015 Kaggle click-through rate prediction 
competition, which is  featured eight data tables  from Avito, Russia’s largest classifieds and 
commodity trading platform. The dataset samples users’ information and search activity on 
avito.ru. For each user, one target impression between May 12 and May 20 is selected randomly 
as the test instance. In this dataset, the testing data are the collection of these target impressions, 
the training data include s all users’ activities during at least 16 consecutive days from April 25 
until the target impression.  
Outbrain Click Prediction10. This dataset contains users’ activities across multiple publisher 
sites in the United States, which consists of over 2 billion records of page views. 
Ali-CCP11. This dataset was collected from logs of the recommender system in Taobao . 
Every row in the logs represents an impression, and contains fields, such as user ID, gender, age, 
shop ID, and others.  In this dataset, the t raining set and the testing set are split along the time 
sequence. 
Aliyun Taobao display advertising dataset 12. This dataset includes 26 million ad display 
and click logs collected from 1.14 million sampled users on Taobao during 8 days, containing ad 
information, user profiles, and user shopping behavior records. 
5.1.2 Synthetic datasets 
Bench-CTR is equipped with two synthetic data generation algorithms  for CTR prediction.  The 
                                            
7 https://www.kaggle.com/c/kddcup2012-track2 (accessed on July 1, 2025)  
8 http://contest.ipinyou.com (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
9 https://www.kaggle.com/c/avito-context-ad-clicks/data (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
10 https://www.kaggle.com/c/outbrain-click-prediction/data (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
11 https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/408 (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
12 https://tianchi.aliyun.com/dataset/56 (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
17 
 
former produces users’ behaviors and click-through records based on predefined data distributions, 
such as predefined interaction patterns ( Tian et al. , 2023), and conditional probability rules that 
feature groups jointly affect CTR prediction with predefined probabilities (Li et al., 2020c; Cao et 
al., 2021). The latter creates synthetic data by leveraging generative models, such as the synthetic 
minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE), conditional tabular generative adversarial network 
(CTGAN), tabular variational autoencoder (TVAE),  denoising diffusion probabilistic model  
(DDPM), latent diffusion model (Xu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2024b), and data distillation (Wang 
et al., 2023a). We will present details about the two synthetic data generation algorithms in Section 
6.1.2.  
5.2 A multi-level taxonomy of evaluation metrics 
In this section, we introduce mathematical definitions for evaluation metrics for CTR prediction, 
and discuss their advantages and disadvantages, as well as formal relationships among them.  
5.2.1 Definitions of metrics 
Metrics are quantitative measures to calibrate the  performance of CTR prediction models . 
According to their definitions, the metrics can be organized in a hierarchical framework with four 
levels. 
(1) The first-level metrics are the fundamental measures, upon which high-level metrics are 
constructed. 
 True positive (TP) is defined as the number of instances where the model correctly predicts 
a click, i.e., when both the predicted result and the actual label indicate a click. 
 False positive (FP)  is defined as t he number of instances where the model incorrectly 
predicts a click, i.e., when the predicted result indicates a click, but the actual label indicates a non-
click. 
 True negative (TN) is defined as the number of instances where the model correctly predicts 
a non-click, i.e., when both the predicted result and the actual label indicate a non-click. 
 False negative (FN) is defined as  the number of instances where the model incorrectly 
predicts a non -click, i.e., when the predicted result indicates a non -click, but the actual label 
indicates a click. 
 Predicted probability is defined as  the likelihood value predicted by the model, i.e., the 
18 
 
probability that a user will click on an advertisement. 
(2) The second-level metrics are constructed based on the first-level metrics.  
 Precision is defined as the number of true positive s divided by the number of positive 
predictions, i.e., the proportion of ads predicted to be clicked that are actually clicked by users , 
which is given as follows. 
𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 =  
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃 .      (3) 
Precision is useful in scenarios where false positives (e.g., non-clicks predicted as clicks ) 
have detrimental effects (e.g., overestimating clicks); however, it ignores false negatives  (i.e., 
undetected clicks).  
 Recall is defined as the number of true positives divided by the number of actual positiv e 
instances, i.e., the proportion of actual clicks correctly predicted by the model , which is given as 
follows. 
𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 =  
𝑇𝑃
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁 .      (4) 
Recall is useful in scenarios where false negatives (e.g., clicks predicted as non-clicks) have 
detrimental effects (e.g., underestimating clicks); however, it ignores false positives, which may 
result in a model with high recall while generating a number of incorrect predictions. 
 Accuracy is defined as the proportion of all predictions that are correct , which is given as 
follows. 
Accuracy =  
𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁 
𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑁 .      (5) 
Accuracy provides a balanced assessment of model performance by considering positive and 
negative predictions; however, it is not suitable for imbalanced datasets. 
 Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) takes TP, TN, FP , and FN into account , and its 
value ranges from -1 to 1, where 1 indicates a perfect prediction, 0 indicates a prediction no better 
than random guessing, and -1 indicates a completely inverse prediction, which is given as follows. 
MCC =
𝑇𝑃×𝑇𝑁−𝐹𝑃×𝐹𝑁
√(𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃)×(𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁)×(𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑃)×(𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑁).      (6) 
MCC provides a more balanced evaluation of model performance by  considering all 
components of the confusion matrix containing predicted and actual  results for clicks and non -
clicks; however, it is less intuitive than accuracy. 
 Logloss is defined as the divergence between predicted probabilities and actual users’ 
19 
 
behaviors, and its value ranges from 0 to infinity , where the higher value indicates the greater 
divergence, which is given as follows. 
Logloss = −
1
𝑁 ∑ (𝑦𝑖 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑝𝑖) + (1 − 𝑦𝑖) 𝑙𝑜𝑔(1 − 𝑝𝑖))𝑁
𝑖=1 ,      (7) 
where N is the number of instances , 𝑦𝑖 is the actual value ( i.e., click and non -click) for the i-th 
instance, and 𝑝𝑖 is the predicted probability of the i-th instance. 
Logloss measures model performance by heavily penalizing incorrect predictions with high 
confidence score; however, it is sensitive to outliers. 
 Mean square error (MSE) quantifies the average squared difference between the predicted 
probabilities and the actual users’ behaviors. The lower value of MSE indicates the better model 
performance. It is given as follows. 
MSE =
1
𝑁 ∑ (𝑦𝑖 − 𝑝𝑖)2𝑁
𝑖=1 .      (8) 
MSE measures the  model performance by heavily penalizing larger prediction errors; 
however, it is sensitive to outliers and is difficult to interpret in classification tasks. 
 Click over predicted click (COPC)  is defined as dividing the actual click rate by the 
predicted click rate to assess models’ tendency of overestimating or underestimating clicks. The 
value of COPC less than 1 indicates that the model overestimates clicks. It is given as follows. 
COPC =
∑ 𝑦𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=1
∑ 𝑝𝑖𝑁
𝑖=1
.      (9) 
COPC assesses model performance by predicting click volumes (Chen et al., 2022a); however, 
it does not account for the calibration performance, leading to an incomplete assessment. 
 Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD)  is defined as the divergence between the predicted 
click probabilities and the actual probabilities. The lower KLD value indicates that the predicted 
probabilities are closer to the actual distribution. It is given as follows. 
KLD = ∑ 𝑦𝑖
′𝑁
𝑖=1 log
𝑦𝑖
′
𝑝𝑖
′ ,      (10) 
where 𝑦𝑖
′  is a normalized actual value, 𝑝𝑖
′  is a normalized predicted value, and 𝑁 is the total 
number of instances. 
KLD measures the difference between predicted and actual click probability distributions ; 
however, it is sensitive to outliers. 
 Field-level calibration error measures the difference between predicted and observed CTR 
within specific field segments , including field-level expected calibration error (Field -ECE) and 
20 
 
field-level relative calibration error (Field -RCE). Specifically, Field-ECE is defined as the 
weighted sum of the predicted average error in each segment, and Field-RCE is defined as the 
average error rate divided by the actual values, which are given as follows. 
Field-ECE =
1
|𝒟| ∑ |∑ (𝑦𝑖 − 𝑝𝑖)|𝐷|
𝑖=1 1[𝑧𝑖=𝑧]||𝑍|
𝑧=1 ,      (11) 
Field-RCE =
1
|𝒟| ∑ 𝑁𝑧
|𝑍|
𝑧=1
|∑ (𝑦𝑖−𝑝𝑖)|𝐷|
𝑖=1 𝟏[𝑧𝑖=𝑧]|
∑ (𝑦𝑖+𝜖)|𝐷|
𝑖=1 𝟏[𝑧𝑖=𝑧]
,      (12) 
where |𝒟| is the total number of instances, input space is divided into |𝑍| disjoint segments, 𝑁𝑧 is 
the number of instances in each segment, and 𝜖 is a small positive constant to prevent division by 
zero. 
Field-level calibration error provides consistent and reliable assessments by evaluating 
calibration among specific fields  (Guo et al., 2022b) ; however, it requires manual selection of 
fields and fail to account for unselected fields. 
(3) The third-level metrics are constructed based on the second-level metrics.  
 Area under ROC curve (AUC-ROC) is defined as the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curve by illustrating the trade-off between the true positive rate and the false 
positive rate across different thresholds, and its value ranges from 0 to 1, where the higher value 
indicates better model performance. Note that TPR is identical to recall, as defined in Equation (4). 
FPR is defined as follows. 
𝐹𝑃𝑅 =
𝐹𝑃
𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑁.      (13) 
AUC-ROC handles imbalanced datasets better than accuracy ; however,  it may be overly 
optimistic when the dataset is extremely imbalanced.  
 Area under precision recall curve (AUC -PR) is defined as the area under  the curve by 
illustrating the trade-off between precision and recall across different thresholds. The higher AUC-
PR value indicates the model can effectively balance precision and recall. 
AUC-PR is suitable for imbalanced datasets; however, it ignores true negatives. 
 F1 score is defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall, which is given as follows. 
𝐹1 =
2×𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛×𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 .      (14) 
F1 score balances precision and recall , enabling the evaluation of model’s ability to predict 
potential clicks while minimizing errors ; however, it represents model performance at a specific 
threshold, which may not capture the overall model performance. 
21 
 
 Root mean square error (RMSE) is defined as the square root of the MSE. The lower RMSE 
value indicates better model performance. It is given as follows. 
𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸 = √
1
𝑁 ∑ (𝑦𝑖 − 𝑝𝑖)2𝑁
𝑖=1 .      (15) 
RMSE heavily penalizes larger errors through squaring operation, which aligns with CTR 
prediction tasks where mispredictions impact advertising campaign performance; however, it is 
sensitive to outliers. 
 Relative information gain (RIG)  is defined as  the relative improvement of model 
performance compared to a baseline model by comparing their Logloss values, ranging from 0 to 
1. The higher RIG value indicates better model performance. It is given as follows. 
𝑅𝐼𝐺 = 1 −
𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙
𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒
.     (16) 
RIG provides a normalized measure of performance improvement over a baseline model ; 
however, it depends on the selection of a baseline model, which can influence the results.  
(4) The fourth-level metric is constructed based on the third-level metrics.  
 Relative improvement (RelaImpr)  is defined as  the relative improvement of model 
performance compared to a baseline model by comparing their AUC-ROC values. The RelaImpr 
value greater than 0 indicates the model outperforms the baseline model. It is given as follows. 
𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑎𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑟 =
𝐴𝑈𝐶𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙−0.5
𝐴𝑈𝐶𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒−0.5 − 1.      (17) 
RelaImpr measures the model performance relative to a baseline model; however, it requires 
manual selection of a baseline model, which affects the results. 
5.2.2 Categories and relationships among metrics  
Evaluation m etrics introduced in Section 5.2.1 can be categorized into two groups, namely 
confusion matrix -based and probability -based metrics . Specifically, c onfusion matrix -based 
metrics include precision, recall, accuracy, MCC, AUC-ROC, AUC-PR, F1 score, and RelaImpr, 
which are constructed based on components of confusion matrix (i.e., TP, FP, TN, and FN) ; 
probability-based metrics include Logloss, field-level calibration error, KLD, COPC, MSE, RMSE, 
and RIG , which are constructed based on the predicted probability . Based on mathematical 
definitions of these metrics  introduced in Section 5.2.1, we can draw r elationships among them, 
as shown in Figure 2.  
22 
 
 
Figure 2. Relationships among evaluation metrics for CTR prediction 
5.3 The evaluation procedure 
The evaluation procedure includes dataset selection, validation, hyper-parameter settings, metrics 
selection, comparison, sensitivity analysis, and ablation studies, as shown in Figure 3.  
5.3.1 Dataset selection 
In CTR prediction, researchers need to select the most suitable datasets to fulfil their research 
objectives, considering the following criteria . First, the advertising formats (e.g., search ads and 
display ads) associated with the selected datasets should be consistent with the application scenario 
considered by CTR prediction models . However, it is worthwhile to note that a large portion of 
existing research fails to capture the specifics of advertising types in their models (Yang and Zhai, 
2022) and thus ignore s this principle of dataset selection . Second, some CTR prediction models 
take advantage of a set of specified features, for example, LLM-based models largely need textual 
features (Fu et al., 2023), and MLLM (multi-modal large language model)-based models rely on 
image or video inputs. Third, CTR prediction models based on semantics and knowledge graphs 
may need explicit definitions of features in datasets  (Jin et al., 2025) . Lastly, it is necessary to 
consider the popularity of datasets which may facilitate experimental comparisons and in turn 
convince other researchers and practitioners. 

23 
 
 
Figure 3. The evaluation procedure for CTR prediction 
5.3.2 Validation methods 
In order to obtain reliable performance of CTR prediction models, researchers employ validation 
methods to split a given dataset into statistically independent training, validation and testing sets. 
Specifically, training set enables models to learn patterns from data, validation set is employed for 
hyper-parameter tuning and overfitting  detection, and testing set prov ides the final evaluation of 
model performance. Technically, validation methods are used to assess the model  generalization 
on unseen data and prevent optimistic bias. In the literature on CTR prediction, there are two most 
widely used validation methods, including hold-out validation and cross-validation. 
Hold-out validation splits a dataset into distinct subsets in two ways. One way is to randomly 
split the dataset in the  ratio such as 8:1:1 or 7:2:1, representing the proportions for training, 
validation, and testing, respectively (Cheng et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024b; Sang et al., 2024). Another 
is chronological splitting, where the dataset is divided into multiple periods based on intervals 
(e.g., days, weeks) or the sequence of users’ behaviors (Qin et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2022a; Wang 

24 
 
et al., 2022a). 
Cross-validation splits the dataset s into k groups. Each group is iteratively used as the 
validation set and the other groups serve as the training set. The final  model performance is  
calculated as the average results of k runs, where k is commonly set to 5 or 10 (Kumar et al., 2015). 
5.3.3 Hyper-parameter settings 
The performance of CTR prediction model s is affected by settings of various hyper-parameters 
(e.g., learning rate and embedding size) . Consequently, researchers  conduct hyper-parameter 
optimization to identify the optimal setting of hyper-parameters from multiple parameter 
combinations, by using grid search (or random search). 
Grid search exhaustively traverses hyper-parameter settings from a grid of specified hyper-
parameter values. 
Random search randomly samples hyper-parameter settings from predefined distributions 
over possible hyper-parameter values. 
5.3.4 Metrics selection 
In the literature, researchers have employed  a variety of evaluation metric s to provide a 
quantitative measure of the model performance. However, it is not straightforward to select 
appropriate metrics from a large amount of options, as introduced in Section 5.2.1.  
In the following, we summarize evaluation metrics used in the literature on CTR prediction  
in online advertising . Figure 4 presents a heatmap illustrating the frequency of metric usage  in 
articles published from 2012 to 202 4, where blue cells correspond to probability-based metrics 
and yellow cells correspond to  confusion matrix -based metrics, with darker shades indicating 
higher usage frequencies. It is important to note that each percentage represents the proportion of 
articles that used a given metric out  of those published in a specific year , and the percentages 
typically sum to equal or more than 100% in a specific year because individual articles may employ 
multiple metrics simultaneously. The original counts and percentages underlying Figure 4  are 
provided in Appendix A.2. 
From Figure 4, we can observe the following phenomena in metrics selection: (1) AUC-ROC 
and Logloss are the most commonly used metrics for CTR prediction; specifically, a high usage 
rate of AUC-ROC has been maintained from 2012 to 2024, reaching a maximum rate of 100% in 
2013 and 2023, and the usage rate of Logloss  has increased from 25% in 2012 to 68% in 2023,  
25 
 
indicating a growing acceptance of Logloss as evaluation metric by researchers; (2) the remaining 
confusion matrix-based metrics excluding AUC-ROC had low usage rates over years, so did the 
remaining probability-based metrics excluding Logloss. In summary, AUC-ROC and Logloss are 
two complementary  and reliable  metrics for CTR prediction tasks , which be explained with 
mathematical definitions and formal relationships of evaluation metrics mentioned in Section 5.2. 
Specifically, on one hand, AUC-ROC provides a balanced performance assessment by measuring 
the trade-off between true positive rate and false positive rate across all thresholds. In contrast, 
AUC-PR excludes true negatives  and thereby neglects the model’s ability to identify non -clicks; 
meanwhile, although accuracy and MCC consider  all components of the confusion mat rix, the 
former produces less reliable results on imbalanced datasets and the latter  offers less intuitive 
interpretation, compared to AUC-ROC. On the other hand, Logloss directly evaluates probability 
estimates while penalizing incorrect predictions with high confidence.  
 
Figure 4. The heatmap of metrics used in the literature on CTR prediction (2012-2024) 

26 
 
5.3.5 Comparison 
In the literature on CTR prediction, r esearchers have to conduct experimental comparisons to 
validate the effectiveness of their proposed models by comparing them with baseline models . 
However, there are a wide range of existing CTR prediction models. Hereby, we analyze baseline 
models utilized in the literature on CTR prediction in online, as shown in Figure 5. From Figure 5, 
we find that t he evolution of baseline model selection can be divided into three periods . 
Specifically, in the first period (before 2016), LR and FMs have been commonly used as baseline 
models; in the second period (2017-2019), the set of baseline models have been expanded with 
Wide&Deep and DeepFM, and several additional models (e.g., AFM and NFM) employed by 
some studies to increase the model diversity; and in the third period (after 2020), the set of baseline 
models have been extended to include AutoInt, along with several additional models (e.g., PNN 
and xDeepFM). As for baseline model selection  in CTR prediction, it is suggested to include 
baselines in the third period , namely LR, FMs, Wide&Deep, DeepFM, and AutoInt.  Moreover, 
CTR prediction models recently developed in high-tier journals and conferences represent up-to-
date advancements in this area, which should be included as obligatory baselines. Additionally, it 
is a wise option to prioritize models with publically available code to facilitate the reproducibility.  
 
Figure 5. Evolution of baseline model selection over years 
5.3.6 Sensitivity analysis 
In CTR prediction research, sensitivity analysis  has been conducted to explore how hyper -
parameters affect the model performance. Table 2 shows the hyper-parameters usage in sensitivity 
analysis in the CTR prediction literature. Moreover, the hyper-parameters and their typical values 
are presented as follows. (1) Dropout is a regularization technique that randomly sets a fraction of 

27 
 
input units to zero during model training. The dropout ratio is  commonly selected from  
{0,0.1,0.2, . . . ,0.9} . (2) Activation functions in neural networks introduce the non-linearity for 
learning complex interactions and patterns . In the literature on CTR prediction, there are three 
most widely used activation functions, including Sigmoid, ReLU, and Tanh. (3) The embedding 
size defines the dimensionality of embeddings, whose effect is typically explored in the range from 
8 to 256. (4) The number of hidden layers represents the depth of a neural network , which  
commonly ranges from 1 to 7. (5) The number of hidden neurons refers to the number of units in 
each hidden layer , which is commonly set in the range from 10 to 2000.  (6) The n umber of 
interacting layers is typically set in the range from 1 to 8, which are applied for modeling feature 
interactions.  
Table 2. Hyper-parameters of CTR prediction models 
Hyper-parameters References 
The dropout ratio Chen et al. (2016); Xiao et al. (2017); He & Chua (2017); Guo et al. (2017) 
Activation functions Qu et al. (2016); He & Chua (2017); Guo et al. (2017); Lian et al. (2018); 
Niu & Hou(2020) 
The embedding size Pan et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2019); Song et al. (2019); Tao et al. (2020); 
Zhai et al. (2023) 
The number of hidden 
layers 
Qu et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2017); Lian et al. (2018); Huang et al. 
(2019);Niu and Hou (2020); Cheng et al. (2020) 
The number of hidden 
neurons 
Guo et al. (2017); Lian et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2019); Niu & Hou(2020); 
Cheng et al. (2020) 
The number of 
interacting layers 
Blondel et al. (2016); Covington et al. (2016); Guo et al. (2017); Wang et al. 
(2017); Lian et al. (2018); Qu et al. (2018); Song et al. (2019); Cheng et al. 
(2020); Wang et al. (2023b) 
5.3.7 Ablation studies 
In the literature on CTR prediction, researchers have to conduct ablation studies  to evaluate the 
contribution of individual components to the full model performance in the following steps. The 
first step is to identify key components of the proposed model, e.g., attention mechanisms in the 
model of Li et al. (2020c) and adversarial learning in the model of Li et al. (2022). Subsequently, 
a set of variant models are coined by removing or modifying these components from the full model 
(Yang et al., 2023b; Yang et al., 2024 ; Zhang et al., 2024a). Finally, these variants are compared 
with the full model to evaluate how individual components contribute to the overall performance. 
6. Bench-CTR implementation and the comparative study 
We implement a benchmark platform for CTR p rediction (Bench -CTR). I n this section, we 
conduct a comparative study on Bench-CTR to validate 15 CTR prediction models in terms of 11 
28 
 
metrics on three public datasets and two synthetic datasets. 
6.1 Implementation details of Bench-CTR 
6.1.1 Platform implementation  
We implement the Bench -CTR platform using Python 3.8.19 and PyTorch 2.4.1, following the 
architecture shown in Figure 1, with modular components for follow-up extensions. Specifically, 
the dataset interface loads public datasets and saves processed results into HDF5 files for efficient 
loading in subsequent steps, and also provides synthetic data generation algorithms to create 
datasets through configurable parameter settings; CTR prediction models have been encapsulated 
through the modeling interface in PyTorch; the training module supports mechanisms of learning 
rate decay, early stopping, and random seed management; the evaluation component supports 11 
metrics with automatic logging of detailed experimental results , hyper-parameters and metric 
values.  
6.1.2 Synthetic data generation algorithms 
In the following we propose two synthetic data generation algorithms  for CTR prediction in the 
Bench-CTR platform: one is rule-based and another is diffusion-based.  
(1) The rule-based synthetic data generation 
The rule-based synthetic data generation process consists of three steps , including feature 
generation, feature interaction and click label generation, as shown in Algorithm 1. In the first step, 
numerical and categorical features  are generated for each instance 𝑥. Categorical features are 
generated following 𝑥𝑓 ∼ 𝐶𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙(𝐶𝑓, 𝑃𝑓), where 𝑥𝑓 is the value of categorical feature 𝑓 for 
instance 𝑥, 𝐶𝑓  represents the set of values for the categorical feature  𝑓, and 𝑃𝑓  represents the 
probability distribution . For numerical features, user ’s age is generated following a truncated 
normal distribution bounded between 0 and 100, and item ’s price is generated following a log-
normal distribution bounded between 1 and 30,000. In the second step, we design a function to 
model different orders of feature interactions. Following Li et al. (2020c), feature interactions are 
defined at three levels, namely the first-, second- and third-orders. For each interaction order, in a 
predefined cluster of features,  similarity scores between the generated feature s and predefined 
target features are calculated and  multiplied together, and then weighted with the cluster’s 
importance and summed to get the interaction score, i.e., 𝐼𝑘(𝑥) =  ∑ 𝑤𝑔 ∏ 𝑠(𝑥𝑓, 𝑡𝑓)𝑓∈𝑔𝑔∈𝐺𝑘 , where 
29 
 
𝐼𝑘(𝑥) denotes the k-th order interaction score for instance 𝑥, 𝑠(𝑥𝑓, 𝑡𝑓) denotes the similarity score 
function, 𝑡𝑓  is the  predefined target value , 𝑤𝑔  represents the feature interaction weight for the 
cluster 𝑔, and 𝐺𝑘  is the set of feature clusters for order 𝑘 . In the third step, the final click 
probability is computed by combining the base probability with a weighted sum of interaction 
scores according to 𝑝(𝑦 = 1|𝑥) = 𝛽0 + ∑ 𝛼𝑘𝐼𝑘(𝑥)𝐾
𝑘=1 , where 𝑝(𝑦 = 1|𝑥)  is the final click 
probability, 𝛽0 is the base click -through rate set to 0.01 following Yang et al. (2017), 𝛼𝑘 is the 
weight for different orders, and 𝐾 denotes the total order of feature interaction . The click label is 
sampled from a Bernoulli distribution  according to 𝑌~𝐵𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑙𝑖(𝑝(𝑦 = 1|𝑥)), where 𝑌 is the 
click label.  
Algorithm 1 Rule-based synthetic dataset generation 
 Input: The total number of synthetic instances 𝑁, the base click ratio β0. 
 Output: The synthetic dataset 𝐷 with features and click labels. 
1: 𝐷 : = ∅; 
2: for 𝑖 ← 1 to N do 
3:  for each 𝑓 ∈ 𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙_𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑠 do 
4:   𝑥𝑖,𝑓 : = Sample from 𝐶𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙(𝐶𝑓, 𝑃𝑓); 
5:  end for 
6:  𝑎𝑔𝑒 : = Sample from 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙([0,100]); 
7:  𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑒 : = Sample from 𝐿𝑜𝑔𝑁𝑜𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙([1,30000]); 
8:  𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 : = 0; 
9:  for 𝑘 ← 1 to 𝐾 do 
10:   𝐼𝑘 : = 0; 
11:   for each 𝑔 ∈ 𝐺𝑘 do 
12:    𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 : = 𝑤𝑔 ∏ 𝑠(𝑥𝑖,𝑓, 𝑡𝑓)𝑓∈𝑔 ; 
13:    𝐼𝑘 : = 𝐼𝑘 +  𝑐𝑙𝑢𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑟_𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒; 
14:   end for 
15:   𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 : = 𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 + α𝑘𝐼𝑘; 
16:  end for 
17:  p(𝑦 = 1|𝑥) ∶= β0 +  𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒; 
18:  𝑌 ∶= Sample from 𝐵𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑙𝑖(p(𝑦 = 1|𝑥)); 
19:  𝐷 ∶= 𝐷 ∪ {(𝑥𝑖,1, 𝑥𝑖,2, . . . , 𝑥𝑖,10, 𝑌)}; 
20: end for 
21: return 𝐷 
 
(2) The diffusion-based synthetic data generation 
The diffusion-based approach leverages a latent diffusion model for tabular data generation 
(Zhang et al., 2024b), integrating CTR prediction loss to effectively capture feature interactions 
and users’ behavioral patterns relevant to CTR prediction  tasks, as shown in Algorithm 2. The 
30 
 
whole process consists of two phases, including training phase and generation phase.  
During the training phase, the latent diffusion model learns the underlying data distribution 
and patterns related to CTR prediction through three steps . In the first step,  a variational 
autoencoder (VAE) is employed to map the real CTR prediction dataset into a continuous latent 
space. Specifically, the VAE encoder network transforms features  into latent representation s 
through fully connected layers with ReLU  (rectified linear unit) activation and dropout 
regularization. The reparameterization trick (e.g., reparameterization gradient estimator) is 
employed to sample the latent representations from a multivariate Gaussian distribution. The VAE 
decoder maps the latent representations back to the original feature space . In the second step , a 
diffusion model with a linear noise schedule is trained to learn the distribution of latent 
representations through forward and  backward processes. In the third step , a CTR predictor is 
jointly trained to regulate the reconstruction process through CTR prediction loss.  
During the generation phase, the synthetic dataset is produced through three steps. In the first 
step, random noise is sampled in the latent space and then the noise prediction network is applied 
to gradually transform the noise into realistic latent representations. In the second step, the realistic 
latent representations are decoded back to feature space through the VAE decoder. In the third step, 
the CTR predictor creates click labels  for the synthetic features , ensuring the generated data 
maintain realistic behavioral patterns consistent with the distribution of the real-world dataset. 
Algorithm 2 Diffusion-based synthetic dataset generation 
 Input: The real-world dataset 𝑋, labels 𝑌, the number of synthetic instances 𝑀. 
Type equation here..  Output: The synthetic dataset 𝐷 with features and click labels. 
1: // Initialization 
2: Initialize V AE, DiffusionModel and CTRPredictor 
3: Set loss weights: 𝜆_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛, 𝜆_𝑘𝑙, 𝜆_𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓, 𝜆_𝑐𝑡𝑟 
4: Set hyper-parameters: 𝑇, 𝛼_𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝, 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 
5: // Training phase 
6: for epoch ← 1 to 𝐸 do 
7:  for each batch (𝑥, 𝑦) ∈ (𝑋, 𝑌) do 
8:   // V AE forward pass 
9:   𝜇, log 𝜎2 : = encoder(𝑥); 
10:   𝑧 : = reparameterize(𝜇, log 𝜎2); 
11:   𝑥_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛 : = decoder(𝑧); 
12:   // Diffusion forward pass 
13:   𝑡 : = sample_timesteps(batch_size); 
14:   𝜀 : = sample from 𝑁(0, 𝐼); 
 
 
 
 
15:   𝑧_𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦 : = add_noise (𝑧, 𝑡, 𝜀); 
16:   𝜀_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 : = DiffusionModel (𝑧_𝑛𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑦, 𝑡); 
31 
 
17:   // CTR prediction 
18:   𝑦_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 : = CTRPredictor(𝑥_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛); 
19:   // Compute loss 
20:   𝐿_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛 : = MSE(𝑥_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛, 𝑥); 
21:   𝐿_𝑘𝑙 : = KL_divergence(𝜇, log 𝜎2); 
22:   𝐿_𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 : = MSE(𝜀_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑, 𝜀); 
23:   𝐿_𝑐𝑡𝑟 : = BCE(𝑦_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑, 𝑦); 
24:   𝐿_𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 : = 𝜆_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛 ×  𝐿_𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛 +  𝜆_𝑘𝑙 × 𝐿_𝑘𝑙 + 𝜆_𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 ×  𝐿_𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 + 𝜆_𝑐𝑡𝑟 × 𝐿_𝑐𝑡𝑟;  
25:   // Parameters update 
26:   Update all model parameters using ∇𝐿_𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 
27:  end for 
28: end for 
29: // Generation phase 
30: 𝐷 : = ∅; 
31: for 𝑖 ← 1 to 𝑀 do 
32:  𝑧 : = sample from 𝑁(0, 𝐼); 
33:  for step ← 1 to num_steps do 
34:   𝑡 : = max(1, step × (𝑇 / num_steps)); 
35:   𝜀_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 : = DiffusionModel (𝑧, 𝑡); 
36:   𝑧 : = 𝑧 − 𝛼_𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝 × 𝜀_𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑;  
37:  end for 
38:  // Generate features and labels 
39:  𝑥_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐 ∶= decoder(𝑧); 
40:  𝑝_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐 ∶= sigmoid(CTRPredictor(𝑥_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐)); 
41:  𝑦_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐 ∶= 𝑝_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐 > 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑; 
42:  𝐷 : = 𝐷 ∪  {(𝑥_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐, 𝑦_𝑠𝑦𝑛𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑡𝑖𝑐)}; 
43: end for 
44: return 𝐷 
6.2 The comparative study  
6.2.1 Models under comparison 
In the comparative study, we validate the performance of 15 state -of-the-art models, including 
multivariate statistical models ( i.e., LR), tree -based models ( i.e., XGBoost), FM-based models 
(i.e., FM, AFM, NFM , and FmFM), DNN -based models ( i.e., PNN), CNN -based models ( i.e., 
CCPM), RNN -based models ( i.e., LSTM), GNN -based models (FiGNN), transformer -based 
models (i.e., AutoInt), ensemble models (i.e., Wide&Deep, DeepFM, and GDCN) and LLM-based 
models (i.e., Uni-CTR).  
6.2.2 Evaluation metrics 
We measure the CTR prediction performance using 11 metrics, including confusion matrix-based 
32 
 
metrics (i .e., AUC-ROC, AUC -PR, precision, recall, accuracy, MCC, and F1 score) and 
probability-base metrics (i.e., Logloss, MSE, RMSE, and COPC).  
6.2.3 Datasets and data preparation 
We use three public datasets (i.e., Criteo, Avazu, and AntM2C) and two synthetic datasets in the 
comparison study. The statistics of the datasets are shown in Table 3.  
Table 3. Summary statistics of Datasets  
Datasets %Positive #Training #Validation #Testing #Fields 
Criteo 26% 36,672K 4,584K 4,584K 39 
Avazu 17% 32,343K 4,043K 4,043K 24 
AntM2C 47% 1,538K 171K 190K 37 
Rule-based synthetic dataset 25% 25,694K 3,212K 3,212K 10 
Diffusion-based synthetic data 26% 80K 10K 10K 39 
Note: K means thousand. 
To ensure optimal model performance, we employ different data preprocessing methods for 
each dataset. For Criteo, missing values of numerical features and categorical features are assigned 
to zeros and null strings , respectively.  Numerical features  are transformed through a binning 
method, i.e.,  𝑓(𝑥) = ⌊(ln(𝑥))2⌋  if 𝑥  exceeds a specified threshold , otherwise  𝑓(𝑥) = ⌊𝑥⌋ . 
Moreover, feature values with frequency less than 10 are mapped to an out-of-vocabulary (OOV) 
token, and others are mapped to unique tokens. For Avazu, missing values of categorical features 
are assigned to null strings. Temporal features are processed to obtain the hour of day, the day of 
week, and the weekend. For AntM2C, we obtain instances of the advertising scenario by filtering 
the dataset with scene ID. Temporal features are processed in a similar way as for Avazu. Note 
that, for LLM-based models, missing values of numerical and categorical features are replaced 
with “unknown”. Following Fu et al. (2023), we consolidate features into textual sequences with 
a defined prompt template. For the two synthetic datasets, we create 32,118K instances by using 
the rule-based data generation algorithm and 80K instances from the Criteo training data by using 
the diffusion-based data generation algorithm, and apply the same binning method as for Criteo.  
6.2.4 Parameter settings 
In the following experiments, we employ grid search to tune key hyper -parameters to ensure fair 
comparison across different models. Specifically, (1) we set the training process with a maximum 
of 99 epochs, incorporating the early stopping condition when there is no further improvement in 
33 
 
the model’s performance during 2 consecutive epochs on the validation dataset;  (2) the learning 
rate is initialized at 0.001 using the Adam optimizer and searched with a manual reduction strategy; 
(3) for categorical features, the embedding dimension is set to 16 and the embedding regularization 
weight is set to 0.000001; (4) in order to make full use of GPU memory , we employ an adaptive 
batch size  strategy initializing at 3,000 and progressively increasing in steps of 1 ,000 until 
encountering an out-of-memory error or reaching a maximum of 30 ,000; (5) the dropout rate is 
chosen from {0.0, 0.1, 0.2}, and the number of hidden layers is searched from {0,1,2,3}; (6) for the 
GNN-based models, the number of GNN layers is selected from {2,3,4}. Moreover, all models are 
evaluated twice using random seeds of 2019 and 2020, and the final metrics are calculated as the 
average results of the two runs. Additionally, the following experiments are performed on NVIDIA 
GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. 
6.3 Experimental results and analysis 
6.3.1 Model performance on the public datasets 
Experimental results on the three public datasets are presented in Tables 4, 5 and 6, respectively. 
It is worth noting that the LLM-based model (i.e., Uni-CTR) is not performed on Criteo and Avazu 
in that the two datasets do not contain textual features. Moreover, the models excluding Uni-CTR 
are trained on 1,538K instances from AntM2C, while Uni-CTR is fine-tuned using low-rank 
adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021) on 30K instances sampled from the same dataset due to limited 
computational resources. For fair comparison, we conduct zero-shot inference using Qwen2.5-
1.5B13 which serves as the language model backbone of Uni-CTR. From Tables 4, 5 and 6, several 
findings can be observed. 
(1) On Criteo , DeepFM achieve s the best results in the majority of evaluation metrics, 
followed by Wide&Deep; on Avazu, PNN outperforms other models in most metrics, followed by 
DeepFM; and on AntM2C, GDCN largely achieves the best performance, followed by Wide&Deep. 
Notably, all of these model s with the best and second -best performance are high-order feature 
interaction models. 
(2) Correlations are observed between AUC-ROC and AUC-PR, between MCC and F1 score, 
as well as among Logloss, MSE, and RMSE, indicating that models performing well on one metric 
                                            
13https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
34 
 
tend to perform well on the related ones. 
(3) The LLM -based model achieves competitive performance compared to other models 
trained on much larger datasets, demonstrating a remarkable data efficiency. As shown in Figure 
6, where the vertical dashed lines indicate the size of the training data, Uni-CTR achieves an AUC-
ROC score of 0.8191 using only 2% of the training data used by other models (e.g., LR, FM, and 
GDCN). Furthermore, the poor performance of Qwen2.5 -1.5B validates the significant 
improvement achieved by Uni-CTR. 
 
Figure 6: Performance of Uni-CTR and other models in terms of AUC-ROC 
(4) It is apparent that COPC is not recommended as a standalone metric for performance 
evaluation, because Qwen2.5-1.5B achieves the best COPC score on AntM2C, but perform worse 
than other models in terms of other metrics.  
(5) Our experimental results reveal challenges in reproducing the relative performance 
between GDCN and DeepFM reported in the paper of Wang et al. (2023b). Specifically, the 
authors reported that AUC -ROC values of GDCN and DeepFM are 0.8161 and 0.8140, 
respectively, while in our study, AUC-ROC values of GDCN and DeepFM are 0.8114 and 0.8142, 
respectively; meanwhile, this phenomenon was also occurred to the metric of Logloss: the authors 
reported that Logloss values of GDCN and DeepFM are 0.4360 and 0.4378, respectively, while in 
our study, Logloss values of GDCN and  DeepFM are 0.4404 and 0.4377, respectively. That is, 

35 
 
Wang et al. (2023b) reported that GDCN outperformed DeepFM, while our study got the opposite 
result, i.e., DeepFM outperformed GDCN. It is worthwhile to note that the result of our study is 
consistent with prior studies (e.g., Wang et al., 2025) and anecdotal evidence of un -replicability 
reported by researchers in the GDCN GitHub repository14. 
6.3.2 Model performance on the rule-based synthetic dataset 
The experimental result on the rule-base synthetic dataset is presented in Table 7. Our findings are 
as follows. (1) The performance gaps among models are minimal, demonstrating that the synthetic 
dataset contains clear and learnable patterns that CTR prediction models of different architectures 
can understand and capture. This consistent model performance indicates that this algorithm 
generates stable and reliable dataset s, making it suitable for researchers and practitioners to 
conduct controllable experiments under different configuration settings. (2) The result on the rule-
based synthetic dataset reaffirms the correlation patterns observed in public datasets, particularly 
the relationships between AUC-ROC and AUC-PR, between MCC and F1 score, as well as among 
Logloss, MSE, and RMSE. 
6.3.3 Model evaluation from synthetic to real-world datasets 
In order to further evaluate the diffusion-based synthetic dataset, we adopt the TSTR ( train on 
synthetic, test on real) (Esteban et al., 2017) procedure, i.e., training the CTR prediction models 
on the synthetic dataset and evaluating the model performance on the real -world dataset (i.e., 
Criteo). Experimental results of performance evaluation from synthetic to real -world datasets are 
presented in Table  8. We find that the A UC-ROC scores of models range from 0.63 to 0.65, 
demonstrating that the synthetic data can effectively capture underlying data distribution and click 
behavioral patterns from real -world datasets.  While these metric scores are lower than those 
achieved by models trained on the full Criteo dataset  (i.e., 36,672K instances), the performance 
gap is primarily attributed to the limited size of training data (i.e., 80K instances). It is worthwhile 
to note that the diffusion -based synthetic dataset is designed as complementary data to mitigate 
data sparsity and data privacy risk s. The experimental results demonstrate the viability of the 
synthetic dataset for maintaining reasonable model performance and mitigating issues such as data 
sparsity and privacy risks. 
                                            
14 https://github.com/anonctr/GDCN/issues (accessed on July 1, 2025) 
36 
 
Table 4. Model performance comparison on Criteo  
Year Feature 
interaction 
order 
Model Confusion matrix-based metrics Probability-based metrics 
AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
Precision Recall Accuracy MCC F1 Logloss MSE RMSE |1-
CPOC| 
<2000 1 LR 0.7930 0.5848 0.6548 0.3554 0.7868 0.3670 0.4607 0.4571 0.1483 0.3851 0.0006 
<2000 >2 LSTM 0.8048 0.6058 0.6524 0.4040 0.7921 0.3941 0.4990 0.4469 0.1446 0.3802 0.0091 
2010 2 FM 0.8074 0.6087 0.6548 0.4059 0.7930 0.3968 0.5012 0.4447 0.1440 0.3794 0.0021 
2015 >2 CCPM 0.8101 0.6145 0.6628 0.4040 0.7946 0.4007 0.5020 0.4417 0.1429 0.3780 0.0019 
2016 >2 XGBoost 0.7714 0.5557 0.6530 0.2908 0.7787 0.3262 0.4024 0.4739 0.1543 0.3928 0.0003 
2016 >2 PNN 0.8134 0.6199 0.6632 0.4151 0.7961 0.4074 0.5106 0.4388 0.1419 0.3767 0.0055 
2016 >2 Wide&Deep 0.8141 0.6215 0.6629 0.4188 0.7965 0.4094 0.5133 0.4379 0.1416 0.3763 0.0138 
2017 2 AFM 0.8046 0.6050 0.6595 0.3887 0.7919 0.3896 0.4891 0.4467 0.1447 0.3804 0.0004 
2017 >2 NFM 0.8089 0.6124 0.6586 0.4061 0.7939 0.3992 0.5024 0.4429 0.1433 0.3786 0.0039 
2017 >2 DeepFM 0.8142 0.6218 0.6637 0.4184 0.7967 0.4097 0.5132 0.4377 0.1415 0.3762 0.0129 
2019 >2 FiGNN 0.8137 0.6207 0.6642 0.4152 0.7964 0.4081 0.5110 0.4384 0.1417 0.3765 0.0030 
2019 >2 AutoInt 0.8116 0.6173 0.6613 0.4126 0.7953 0.4047 0.5081 0.4403 0.1424 0.3774 0.0057 
2021 2 FmFM 0.8107 0.6152 0.6626 0.4060 0.7948 0.4017 0.5035 0.4412 0.1427 0.3778 0.0035 
2023 >2 GDCN 0.8114 0.6172 0.6640 0.4079 0.7954 0.4037 0.5053 0.4404 0.1424 0.3774 0.0142 
Note: The best results across each metric column are bolded, the second-best results are underlined. 
  
37 
 
Table 5. Model performance comparison on Avazu  
Year Feature 
interaction 
order 
Model Confusion matrix-based metrics Probability-based metrics 
AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
Precision Recall Accuracy MCC F1 Logloss MSE RMSE |1-
COPC| 
<2000 1 LR 0.7569 0.3869 0.6115 0.0828 0.8353 0.1804 0.1458 0.3927 0.1233 0.3511 0.0023 
<2000 >2 LSTM 0.7694 0.3995 0.5836 0.1099 0.8355 0.2003 0.1849 0.3870 0.1217 0.3489 0.0117 
2010 2 FM 0.7898 0.4344 0.5813 0.1703 0.8383 0.2507 0.2633 0.3748 0.1180 0.3435 0.0005 
2015 >2 CCPM 0.7906 0.4349 0.6401 0.1097 0.8383 0.2166 0.1872 0.3748 0.1181 0.3437 0.0834 
2016 >2 XGBoost 0.7417 0.3650 0.5972 0.0636 0.8337 0.1545 0.1149 0.4008 0.1255 0.3542 0.0048 
2016 >2 PNN 0.7960 0.4441 0.6157 0.1502 0.8398 0.2468 0.2414 0.3702 0.1167 0.3416 0.0166 
2016 >2 Wide&Deep 0.7916 0.4375 0.6184 0.1360 0.8390 0.2353 0.2230 0.3731 0.1175 0.3428 0.0128 
2017 2 AFM 0.7782 0.4129 0.5887 0.1204 0.8364 0.2116 0.1999 0.3817 0.1201 0.3466 0.0027 
2017 >2 NFM 0.7886 0.4320 0.6235 0.1237 0.8385 0.2255 0.2063 0.3748 0.1181 0.3437 0.0169 
2017 >2 DeepFM 0.7951 0.4428 0.6169 0.1470 0.8396 0.2445 0.2374 0.3712 0.1169 0.3420 0.0306 
2019 >2 FiGNN 0.7896 0.4338 0.6113 0.1389 0.8388 0.2355 0.2263 0.3743 0.1179 0.3434 0.0022 
2019 >2 AutoInt 0.7897 0.4345 0.6113 0.1413 0.8389 0.2377 0.2296 0.3747 0.1180 0.3435 0.0575 
2021 2 FmFM 0.7909 0.4346 0.5822 0.1719 0.8384 0.2523 0.2653 0.3747 0.1180 0.3435 0.0038 
2023 >2 GDCN 0.7874 0.4325 0.6114 0.1383 0.8388 0.2351 0.2256 0.3754 0.1182 0.3438 0.0145 
Note: The best results across each metric column are bolded, the second-best results are underlined. 
  
38 
 
Table 6. Model performance comparison on AntM2C  
Year Feature 
interaction 
order 
Model Confusion matrix-based metrics Probability-based metrics 
AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
Precision Recall Accuracy MCC F1 Logloss MSE RMSE |1-
COPC| 
<2000 1 LR 0.7516 0.7370 0.7758 0.4443 0.6692 0.3619 0.5650 0.6391 0.2235 0.4728 0.0625 
<2000 >2 LSTM 0.8378 0.8329 0.7674 0.7117 0.7563 0.5122 0.7385 0.5119 0.1666 0.4082 0.0778 
2010 2 FM 0.8383 0.8329 0.8815 0.5203 0.7342 0.5033 0.6544 0.5217 0.1746 0.4178 0.2553 
2015 >2 CCPM 0.8513 0.8419 0.7288 0.8087 0.7619 0.5279 0.7666 0.4895 0.1610 0.4012 0.0929 
2016 >2 XGBoost 0.7364 0.7714 0.9203 0.4195 0.7017 0.4647 0.5763 0.6375 0.2099 0.4582 0.2859 
2016 >2 PNN 0.8532 0.8464 0.7440 0.7882 0.7665 0.5342 0.7655 0.4844 0.1584 0.3980 0.0132 
2016 >2 Wide&Deep 0.8588 0.8515 0.7645 0.7633 0.7719 0.5432 0.7639 0.4794 0.1549 0.3936 0.0505 
2017 2 AFM 0.8528 0.8431 0.7887 0.7124 0.7686 0.5377 0.7486 0.4853 0.1587 0.3984 0.0652 
2017 >2 NFM 0.8520 0.8408 0.7884 0.7075 0.7667 0.5341 0.7458 0.4857 0.1587 0.3984 0.0711 
2017 >2 DeepFM 0.8554 0.8484 0.7496 0.7769 0.7666 0.5336 0.7630 0.4724 0.1552 0.3939 0.0532 
2019 >2 FiGNN 0.8500 0.8400 0.7511 0.7739 0.7667 0.5335 0.7623 0.4839 0.1584 0.3980 0.0293 
2019 >2 AutoInt 0.8534 0.8430 0.7711 0.7424 0.7689 0.5371 0.7565 0.4792 0.1568 0.3960 0.0230 
2021 2 FmFM 0.8474 0.8385 0.7686 0.7355 0.7650 0.5293 0.7517 0.4842 0.1587 0.3984 0.0079 
2023 >2 GDCN 0.8605 0.8518 0.7810 0.7385 0.7727 0.5459 0.7582 0.4771 0.1539 0.3923 0.0563 
2023 - Uni-CTR 0.8191 0.8071 0.7578 0.6269 0.7250 0.4517 0.6862 0.5097 0.1709 0.4134 0.0467 
2024 - Qwen2.5-
1.5B 
0.4570 0.4511 0.4350 0.2972 0.4722 -0.0723 0.3435 0.7043 0.2555 0.5055 0.0024 
Note: The best results across each metric column are bolded, the second-best results are underlined.  
  
39 
 
Table 7. Model performance comparison on the rule-based synthetic dataset  
Year Feature 
interaction 
order 
Model Confusion matrix-based metrics Probability-based metrics 
AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
Precision Recall Accuracy MCC F1 Logloss MSE RMSE |1-
COPC| 
<2000 1 LR 0.9045 0.7709 0.7104 0.6052 0.8396 0.5532 0.6536 0.3300 0.1061 0.3257 0.0002 
<2000 >2 LSTM 0.9063 0.7753 0.6745 0.7064 0.8413 0.5838 0.6900 0.3153 0.1020 0.3193 0.0152 
2010 2 FM 0.9055 0.7733 0.6968 0.6332 0.8394 0.5594 0.6635 0.3213 0.1033 0.3214 0.0011 
2015 >2 CCPM 0.9063 0.7753 0.6750 0.7036 0.8412 0.5826 0.6890 0.3151 0.1019 0.3192 0.0010 
2016 >2 XGBoost 0.9050 0.7722 0.6914 0.6467 0.8395 0.5632 0.6683 0.3221 0.1036 0.3218 0.0007 
2016 >2 PNN 0.9064 0.7755 0.6719 0.7148 0.8415 0.5865 0.6927 0.3149 0.1018 0.3191 0.0008 
2016 >2 Wide&Deep 0.9064 0.7755 0.6716 0.7162 0.8415 0.5870 0.6932 0.3149 0.1018 0.3191 0.0017 
2017 2 AFM 0.9053 0.7734 0.6903 0.6559 0.8404 0.5675 0.6726 0.3195 0.1029 0.3208 0.0008 
2017 >2 NFM 0.9064 0.7755 0.6721 0.7139 0.8414 0.5862 0.6924 0.3150 0.1018 0.3191 0.0011 
2017 >2 DeepFM 0.9064 0.7755 0.6727 0.7113 0.8413 0.5852 0.6915 0.3149 0.1018 0.3191 0.0004 
2019 >2 FiGNN 0.9064 0.7754 0.6711 0.7169 0.8414 0.5871 0.6933 0.3150 0.1019 0.3191 0.0001 
2019 >2 AutoInt 0.9064 0.7755 0.6715 0.7160 0.8414 0.5868 0.6930 0.3149 0.1018 0.3191 0.0005 
2021 2 FmFM 0.9055 0.7734 0.6967 0.6335 0.8394 0.5596 0.6636 0.3212 0.1032 0.3213 0.0014 
2023 >2 GDCN 0.9063 0.7754 0.6742 0.7064 0.8413 0.5836 0.6899 0.3150 0.1019 0.3192 0.0008 
Note: The best results across each metric column are bolded, the second-best results are underlined. 
  
40 
 
Table 8. Model performance evaluation from synthetic to real-world datasets 
Year Feature 
interaction 
order 
Model Confusion matrix-based metrics Probability-based metrics 
AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
Precision Recall Accuracy MCC F1 Logloss MSE RMSE |1-
COPC| 
<2000 1 LR 0.6526 0.4010 0.4422 0.3935 0.7178 0.2319 0.4165 0.5469 0.1818 0.4264 0.1437 
<2000 >2 LSTM 0.6402 0.3638 0.3446 0.6106 0.5781 0.1708 0.4193 0.6001 0.2059 0.4534 0.3328 
2010 2 FM 0.6438 0.4021 0.3696 0.5455 0.6455 0.2029 0.4406 0.6419 0.2144 0.4631 0.3818 
2015 >2 CCPM 0.6517 0.4044 0.4502 0.3382 0.7250 0.2172 0.3862 1.2910 0.2367 0.4866 0.3563 
2016 >2 XGBoost 0.6470 0.3754 0.4421 0.2720 0.7257 0.1842 0.3360 0.5901 0.1935 0.4399 0.1302 
2016 >2 PNN 0.6479 0.3983 0.5092 0.1413 0.7418 0.1378 0.1913 0.5544 0.1849 0.4300 0.0329 
2016 >2 Wide&Deep 0.6471 0.3983 0.4378 0.3660 0.7006 0.1989 0.3598 0.5727 0.1925 0.4386 0.2281 
2017 2 AFM 0.6503 0.4007 0.4732 0.2624 0.7361 0.2019 0.3364 0.5406 0.1789 0.4230 0.0198 
2017 >2 NFM 0.6500 0.3974 0.5271 0.1149 0.7465 0.1483 0.1856 0.5771 0.1939 0.4403 0.2049 
2017 >2 DeepFM 0.6487 0.3992 0.4986 0.1698 0.7424 0.1674 0.2458 0.5575 0.1856 0.4308 0.1757 
2019 >2 FiGNN 0.6450 0.3969 0.2416 0.0813 0.7427 0.0799 0.1216 0.5524 0.1836 0.4285 0.0398 
2019 >2 AutoInt 0.6509 0.3978 0.5160 0.0563 0.7454 0.0974 0.0986 0.5592 0.1863 0.4317 0.1566 
2021 2 FmFM 0.6557 0.4065 0.3721 0.5684 0.6424 0.2120 0.4487 0.5852 0.1979 0.4448 0.2789 
2023 >2 GDCN 0.6376 0.3762 0.2830 0.8714 0.4016 0.1187 0.4271 2.0144 0.4560 0.6752 0.6412 
Note: The best results across each metric column are bolded, the second-best results are underlined. 
  
41 
 
6.3.4 Results analysis 
In order to provide intuitive visualizations of model performance across all datasets, we employ 
radar graphs to present experimental results for the first-order, second-order and high-order feature 
interaction models. Figures 7(a)-7(d) display the experimental results using two radar graphs for 
each dataset: the left  graph represents model performance in terms of confusion matrix -based 
metrics, where higher values indicate better performance , and t he right graph represents model 
performance in terms of probability-based metrics, where lower values indicate better performance. 
Three distinct color families denote models by feature interaction order: the yellow line represents 
the first-order feature interaction model, the blue lines represent the second-order feature 
interaction models, and the red lines represent high -order feature interaction models.  In order to 
make relative performance gaps apparent in the radar graphs, each metric  value is normalized 
based on its actual range.  
    
Figure 7(a). Radar graphs of model performance on Criteo 
 

42 
 
    
Figure 7(b). Radar graphs of model performance on Avazu 
 
    
Figure 7(c). Radar graphs of model performance on AntM2C 
 

43 
 
    
Figure 7(d). Radar graphs of model performance on the rule-based synthetic dataset 
From Figures 7(a)-7(d), we can observe the following results.  
First, the radar graphs of confusion matrix-based metrics reveal that high-order models (red 
lines) generally outperform low-order models (blue and yellow lines) with larger areas. Similarly, 
the radar graphs of probability-based metrics also reveal that high-order models achieve better 
performance, as the red lines are enclosed within the blue and yellow lines. In other words, high-
order models outperform low-order models despite some exceptions. 
Second, on Criteo, high-order models generally outperform low-order models in terms of all 
metrics. However, on Avazu, the second-order models outperform high-order models in terms of 
some metrics (i.e., MCC, F1 score, and recall). Similarly, on AntM2C and the rule-based synthetic 
datasets, the second-order models  outperform high-order models in terms of precision. This 
phenomenon demonstrates that model performance is affected by dataset characteristics.  
Third, different evaluation metrics show varying sensitivity to high- and low-order models. 
Specifically, high-order models generally outperform low-order models in terms of AUC -ROC, 
AUC-PR, and accuracy on all the datasets , suggesting that these metrics provide stable 
measurements. In contrast, the performance of high- and low -order models shows obvious 
fluctuation in terms of precision and recall , demonstrating that when select ing these evaluation 

44 
 
metrics researchers need to consider model architectures and dataset characteristics. 
Next, we visualize the evolution of model performance  on three public datasets (i.e., Criteo, 
Avazu, and AntM2C), as shown in Figure 8. Figure 8 presents four subplots that show the average 
and best model performance in terms of AUC-ROC and Logloss from 2015 to 2021 , where the 
orange line denotes the results on Avazu, the green line denotes the results on Criteo, and the blue 
line denotes the results on AntM2C. Notably, we exclude 2023 as the Uni-CTR was fine-tuned with 
only 2% of the dataset, which would be insufficient for optimal performance and would skew the 
analysis.  
   
(a) Average model performance in terms of AUC-ROC          (b) Best model performance in terms of AUC-ROC  
    
(c) Average model performance in terms of Logloss               (d) Best model performance in terms of Logloss 
Figure 8: Performance evolution of CTR prediction models over years from 2015 to 2021  
From Figure  8, we observe the phenomenon that b oth the average and best model 
performance in terms of AUC -ROC and Logloss show significant improvements from 2015 to 
2016, particularly in average performance. This substantial progress in the early period likely 
correlates with the introduction of deep learning models. After 2016, however, model performance 
tends to stabilize with relatively slow progress, indicating a performance bottleneck period in CTR 
prediction tasks. Notably, the performance gaps across different datasets remain stable over time, 

45 
 
indicating that dataset characteristics consistently influence model performance. 
7. Research perspectives 
In this section, we discuss the main challenges and future directions in the area of advertising CTR 
prediction. 
7.1 Main challenges 
7.1.1 Low code availability in CTR prediction  
Although a large number of CTR prediction models have been developed, only a small portion of 
articles are accompanied by code.  Even though, code shared by some studies lacks essential 
components such as data preparation, feature engineering and embedding. The low code 
availability and code incompleteness raise a significant challenge for reproducing CTR prediction 
models. Thereby, m any models remain unverifiable  in comparative studies, which h ampers 
progress in the area of CTR prediction.  
To address this issue, the community (e.g., researchers, journals and institutions) should meet 
an agreement that the transparency of code is beneficial to scientific progress in this area . 
Meanwhile, it is suggested for the community to implement explicit code publishing policies for 
encouraging researchers and practitioners to share code and ideas. 
7.1.2 Lack of benchmarking datasets in CTR prediction  
Extant CTR prediction research primarily relies on public datasets such as Criteo and Avazu. These 
datasets which were released over a decade ago, reflect relatively traditional advertising formats  
and fail to support emerging advertising formats, e.g., interactive video advertising, virtual reality 
(VR)-based advertising, and artificial intelligence (AI) generated advertising. Moreover, features 
in the public datasets might be  anonymized due to  privacy concern s, which may hamper the 
evaluation of models relaying on semantics and knowledge graphs and  decrease the model 
interpretation. This situation h as become particularly worse with LLM -based CTR prediction 
models that require multi-modal features and explicit definitions of features.  
Large-scale multi-modal datasets are expected to alleviate this predicament  (Huan et al., 
2024). An alternative way is to develop benchmarking datasets incorporating new digital 
advertising formats and design synthetic data  generation algorithms  enabling researchers to 
46 
 
conduct controllable experiments. 
7.1.3 Increasing computational resource demands in CTR prediction 
The advanced technologies have improved the performance of CTR prediction models. However, 
the computational resource demands have increased significantly.  This resource consumption 
challenge is caused by three main factors. First, embedding parameters  consume substantial 
computational space due to sparse features (Shi et al., 2020 ; Jin & Yang, 2025 ), leading to 
inefficient memory utilization . Second, the adoption of deep learning methods increases model 
architecture complexity. These models are concentrated in the embedding module ( Guo et al., 
2021), with parameters that may exceed 10TB even after quantization ( Zhao et al., 2019 ). The 
integration of large language models escalates this computational resource demand, as exemplified 
by Uni-CTR (Fu et al., 2023) employing a language model with 1.5 billion parameters. Third, the 
large-scale datasets such as AntM2C (Huan et al., 2024) with 1.1 billion instances require greater 
computational power for data processing and model training.  
Fortunately, several recently developed solutions have shown potential efficacies for 
addressing this challenge , e.g., d istillation methods saving substantial computational  resources 
while maintaining the competitive model performance  (Wang et al., 2023a) , and centralized 
training systems employing solid-state drives (SSDs) and GPU s (Zhao et al., 2019) to train CTR 
prediction models with tens-of-terabytes-scale parameters.  
7.1.4 Data imbalance in CTR prediction 
In online advertising, CTR prediction d atasets are highly imbalanced , with the number of non -
clicks vastly outnumbering the clicked ones. This imbalanced distribution of instances impacts the 
training and evaluation processes of CTR prediction models (Liu et al., 201 8; Liu et al., 2023 ; 
Zhang et al., 2024c) in that models tend to excel at predicting the majority class (i.e., non -clicks) 
while performing poorly on the minority class (i.e., click s). Recently, researchers have made 
preliminary investigations on  this issue by using  techniques such as regularized adversarial 
sampling and transfer learning (Xie et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2023).  
7.2 Future directions 
7.2.1 Incorporating LLMs into CTR prediction models 
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate significant potential for improving CTR prediction 
47 
 
through their semantic understanding abilities and extensive world knowledge  (Fu et al., 2023;  
Yuan et al., 2023 ). Specifically, LLMs can be employed to extract and capture meaningful 
semantic signals  (Xi et al. , 2024), enrich semantic feature embeddings  (Qiu et al. , 2024) , and 
generate summaries for advertisements ( Dubey et al ., 2024) . However, most existing studies 
primarily treat LLMs as independent components  for capturing semantic signals , ignoring the 
relationships between semantic signals and graph structural signals. A promising direction is to 
integrate LLMs and graph neural networks (GNNs) into a unified architecture for CTR prediction, 
where GNNs capture feature interactions among users and advertisements via graph structures and 
learn representations through message aggregation and propagation , and LLMs process textual 
information to extract semantic signals that can be incorporated into the graph structure to enhance 
representation learning . This integration could improve model performance  by leveraging 
semantic signals from text information and structural patterns from graphs. 
7.2.2 Contrastive learning for multi-modal CTR prediction 
Multi-modal content that contains rich information for CTR prediction tasks is available on online 
advertising platforms, e.g., textual descriptions, product images, and promotional videos. However, 
many CTR prediction models primarily rely on  categorical and numerical features  and fail to 
exploit multi-modal features  (He et al., 2021). In recent years, researchers have attempted to 
leverage multi-modal features in CTR prediction by merging heterogeneous features into weighted 
vectors (Chen et al., 2020) , and decoupling multi-modal feature interaction into independent 
components (Li et al., 2024a). However, these methods struggle to effectively fuse multi-modal 
information and learn discriminative representations (Xiao et al., 2022)  due to the heterogeneity 
gaps between different modalities.  
Contrastive learning presents a promising approach to bridge the gaps between multi-modal 
features and enhance the discriminative capability of CTR prediction models. Specifically, models 
are trained to dist inguish between positive and negative pairs, where positive pairs consist of 
different modalities representing the same entity (i.e., users and advertisements), and negative 
pairs contain cross-modal combinations from different entities. 
7.2.3 Multi-task learning for CTR prediction 
In the context of online advertising, researchers usually independently process multiple prediction 
tasks, including CTR prediction and conversion rate (CVR) estimation (Xue et al., 2025) . This 
48 
 
approach often yields suboptimal performance because different prediction tasks are inherently 
interconnected (Li et al., 2020a ; Yang et al., 2022 ). Multi-task learning can enhance CTR 
prediction by capturing these underlying relationships and transferring knowledge among related 
tasks.  
In recent years, there has been a growing trend of introducing specialized frameworks for 
multi-task learning, e.g., expert-based frameworks (Ma et al., 2018 ; Tang et al., 2020 ), neural 
network-based frameworks (Fei et al., 2021), end-to-end joint optimization frameworks (Yang et 
al., 2021), and entire-space causal multi-task frameworks (Zhu et al., 2023). Several studies have 
extended these frameworks to simultaneously process multiple prediction tasks in different 
advertising environments  (Zhang et al., 2022 ; Min et al., 2023 ). It is a promising direction  to 
develop frameworks that dynamically optimize knowledge sharing based on task relationships and 
advertising scenarios for CTR prediction.  
7.2.4 Causal inference for CTR prediction 
Existing CTR prediction models primarily rely on capturing correlations rather than causal 
relationships, limiting their generalization to unseen data. Causal inference  improves the 
performance of CTR prediction models by learning the cause-and-effect relationships in users ’ 
behaviors (Gao et al., 2024).  
In this direction, causal inference has been employed to capture high-order interactions (Zhai 
et al., 2023)  and improve result interpretability (Sui et al., 2022) . Further exploration of causal 
inference for CTR prediction is a promising direction. Specifically, causal discovery methods can 
be employed to identify key variables that drive user clicks, thereby guiding model design and 
feature selection. 
8. Conclusion 
In this paper, we provide a benchmark for CTR prediction  in the context of online advertising . 
First, we propose a unified architecture of CTR prediction benchmark (Bench-CTR) platform that 
offers flexible interfaces with datasets and components of a wide range of CTR prediction models. 
Second, we construct a comprehensive system of evaluation protocols encompassing real -world 
and synthetic datasets, a taxonomy of metrics , standardized procedures and experimental 
guidelines for performance assessment of CTR  prediction models. Third, we implement Bench-
CTR and conduct a comparative study to validate 15 CTR prediction models in terms of 11 metrics 
49 
 
on three public datasets  and two synthetic datasets . Results reveal that, (1) high -order models 
largely outperform low-order models, though such advantage varies in terms of metrics and on 
different datasets; (2) models based on large language models  demonstrate a remarkable data 
efficiency, i.e., achieving comparable performance to other models while using only 2% of  the 
training data; (3) the performance of CTR prediction models has achieved significant 
improvements from 2015 to 2016, then reache d a stage with slow progress, which is consistent 
across various datasets.  This benchmark serves as a n environment for model development and 
evaluation, and enhances practitioners’ understanding of the underlying mechanisms of models in 
the area of CTR prediction. 
In future research, we plan to explore domain-specific metrics (e.g., return on investment) for 
advertising effectiveness  by conducting field research or simulating market mechanisms and 
processes in online advertising environments. Second, we will continue to incorporate newly 
developed models into the Bench -CTR platform to k eep pace with the development of CTR 
prediction research.  Last but not least, it is interesting to explore the role of  LLMs in CTR 
prediction evaluation by leveraging their remarkable capabilities in semantic understanding. LLMs 
can be utilized to generate summaries by analyzing comparative results of various models, which 
helps to improve the interpretability of prediction results.  
Declarations 
Funding and/or Conflicts of interests/Competing interests: This work is partially supported by the 
(NSFC National Natural Science Foundation of China) grants (72171093). The authors have no 
competing interests to declare.  
References 
Anelli, V. W., Bellogin, A., Ferrara, A., Malitesta, D., Merra, F. A., Pomo, C., Donini, F. M., & 
Di Noia, T. (2021). Elliot: A Comprehensive and rigorous framework for reproducible 
recommender systems evaluation. In Proceedings of the 44th International A CM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’21). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2405–2414. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3463245. 
Blondel, M., Fujino, A., Ueda, N., & Ishihata, M. (2016). Higher-order factorization machines. In 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems  (NIPS), 29.  
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1607.07195. 
50 
 
Cao, T., Xu, Q., Yang, Z., & Huang, Q. (202 1). Meta-wrapper: differentiable wrapping operator 
for user interest selection in CTR prediction. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, 44(11), 8449–8464. https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3103741. 
Caruccio, L., Cirillo, S., Polese, G., Solimando, G., Sundaramurthy, S., & Tortora, G. (2024). Can 
ChatGPT provide intelligent diagnoses? A comparative study between predictive models and 
ChatGPT to define a new medical diagnostic bot. Expert Systems with Applications, 235, 
121186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.121186. 
Chang, Y.W., Hsieh, C.J., Chang, K.W., Ringgaard, M., & Lin, C.J. (2010). Training and testing 
low-degree polynomial data mappings via linear SVM. Journal of Machine Learning 
Research, 11(11), 1471–1490. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/1756006.1859899. 
Chen, C., Chen, H., Zhao, K., Zhou, J., He, L., Deng, H., Xu, J., et al. (2022a). Extr: Click-through 
rate prediction with externalities in e-commerce sponsored search. In Proceedings of the 28th 
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGIR ’22). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2732–2740. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539053. 
Chen, J., Sun, B., Li, H., Lu, H., & Hua, X.S. (2016). Deep CTR prediction in display advertising. 
In Proceedings of the 24th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (MM ’16). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 811 –820. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2964284.2964325. 
Chen, T., & Guestrin, C. (2016). Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 
22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 
(KDD ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, Ne w York, NY, USA, 785 –794. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785. 
Chen, X., Mitra, S., & Swaminathan, V. (2020). Metadata matters in user engagement prediction. 
In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 1529–1532. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3397271.3401201. 
Chen, X., Tang, Q., Hu, K., Xu, Y., Qiu, S., Cheng, J., & Lei, J. (202 2b). Hybrid CNN based 
attention with category prior for user image behavior modeling. In Proceedings of the 45th 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval (SIGIR ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2336–
2340. https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.3531854. 
Cheng, H.T., Koc, L., Harmsen, J., Shaked, T., Chandra, T., Aradhye, H., Anderson, G., Corrado, 
G., Chai, W., Ispir, M., Anil, R., Haque, Z., Hong, L., Jain, V., Liu, X., & Shah, H. (2016). 
Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In Proceedings of th e 1st Workshop on 
Deep Learning for Recommender Systems (DLRS  ’16). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 7–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/2988450.2988454. 
Cheng, W., Shen, Y., & Huang, L. (2020). Adaptive factorization network: Learning adaptive -
order feature interactions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI ’20). 34, 3609–3616. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v34i04.5768. 
Clark, P., Cowhey, I., Etzioni, O., Khot, T., Sabharwal, A., Schoenick, C., & Tafjord, O. (2018). 
Think you have solved question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1803.05457. 
51 
 
Covington, P., Adams, J., & Sargin,  E. (2016). Deep neural networks for YouTube 
recommendations. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems 
(RecSys ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 191–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2959100.2959190. 
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K., & FeiFei, L. (2009). Imagenet: A large -scale 
hierarchical image database.  In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition (CVPR ’09). 248–255. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848. 
Doimo, D., Serra, A., Ansuini, A., & Cazzaniga, A. (2024). The representation landscape of few-
shot learning and fine-tuning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems (NIPS), 18122–18165. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2409.03662. 
Dubey, A., Feng, Z., Kidambi, R., Mehta, A., & Wang, D. (2024). Auctions with LLM summaries. 
In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining (SIGIR ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 713–722. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3637528.3672022. 
Esteban, C., Hyland, S. L., & Rä tsch, G. (2017). Real-valued (medical) time series generation with 
recurrent conditional GANs. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.02633.  
Fei, H., Zhang, J., Zhou, X., Zhao, J., Qi, X., & Li, P. (2021). GemNN: Gating -enhanced multi-
task neural networks with feature interaction learning for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of 
the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval (SIGIR ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2166–
2171. https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3463116. 
Friedman, J.H. (2001). Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine.  Annals of 
statistics, 29(5), 1189–1232. https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013203451. 
Fu, Z., Li, X., Wu, C., Wang, Y., Dong, K., Zhao, X., Zhao, M., Guo, H., and Tang, R. (2023). A 
unified framework for multi -domain ctr prediction via large language models. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS). https://doi.org/10.1145/3698878. 
Gao C, Zheng Y, Wang W, et al. (2024). Causal inference in recommender systems: A survey and 
future directions. ACM Transactions on Information Systems  (TOIS), 42(4), 1-32. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3639048. 
Geng, B., Huan, Z., Zhang, X., He, Y., Zhang, L., Yuan, F., Zhou, J., & Mo, L. (2024). Breaking 
the length barrier: L LM-enhanced CTR prediction in long textual user behaviors. In 
Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development 
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’24 ). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 2311–2315. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626772.3657974. 
Guo, H.F., Chen, B., Tang, R.M., Zhang, W.N., Li , Z.G., & He, X.Q. (2021). An embedding 
learning framework for numerical features in CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 27th 
ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’21). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2910 –2918. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467077. 
Guo, H., Tang, R., Ye, Y., Li, Z., & He, X. (2017). DeepFM: a factorization-machine based neural 
network for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI ’17). AAAI Press, 1725 –173. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1703.04247. 
52 
 
Guo, W., Zhang, C., He, Z., Qin, J., Guo, H., Chen, B., Tang, R., He, X., & Zhang, R.  (2022a). 
Miss: Multi-interest self-supervised learning framework for click-through rate prediction. In 
2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE  ’22). 727–740. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE53745.2022.00059. 
Guo, Y., Li, H., Ao, X., Lu, M., Liu, D., Xiao, L., Jiang, J., & He, Q . (2022 b). Calibrated 
conversion rate prediction via knowledge distillation under delayed feedback in online 
advertising. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information and 
Knowledge Management (CIKM ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 3983–3987. https://doi.org/10.1145/3511808.3557557. 
He, X., & Chua, T.S. (2017). Neural factorization machines for sparse predictive analytics. In 
Proceedings of the 40th International ACM SIGIR conference on Research and Development 
in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 355–364. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3077136.3080777. 
He, L., Chen, H., Wang, D., Jameel, S., Yu, P., & Xu, G. (2021). Click -through rate prediction 
with multi-modal hypergraphs. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on 
Information & Knowledge Management (CIKM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 690–699. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482327. 
Hochreiter, S., & Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long short -term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), 
1735–1780. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1997.9.8.1735. 
Hu, E. J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen -Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., & Chen, W. (2021). LoRA: low-
rank adaptation of large language models. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2106.09685. 
Huan, Z., Ding, K., Li, A., Zhang, X., Min, X., He, Y., Zhang, L., Zhou, J., Mo, L., Gu, J., Liu, Z., 
Zhong, W., Zhang, G., Li, C., & Yuan, F. (2024). Exploring multi-scenario multi-dodal CTR 
prediction with a large scale dataset. In Proceedings of the 47th In ternational ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’24). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,  1232–1241. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3626772.3657865. 
Huang, T., Zhang, Z., & Zhang, J. (2019). FiBiNET: Combining feature importance and bilinear 
feature interaction for click -through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM 
Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 169–177. https://doi.org/10.1145/3298689.3347043. 
Jin, Y., & Yang, Y. (2025). A survey on knowledge graph -based click-through rate prediction. 
Expert Systems with Applications, 281, 127501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2025.127501. 
Jin, Y., Yang, Y. & Ma, B.  (2025). Dynamic heterogeneous graph convolutional networks for 
click-through rate prediction in recommender systems. Electronic Commerce Research, 1-30. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10660-025-09978-y. 
Juan, Y., Zhuang, Y., Chin, W.S., & Lin, C.J. (2016). Field-aware factorization machines for CTR 
prediction. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys 
’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 43 –50. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2959100.2959134. 
Ke, G., Xu, Z., Zhang, J., Bian, J., & Liu, T.Y. (2019). DeepGBM: A deep learning framework 
distilled by GBDT for online prediction tasks. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’19). Association 
53 
 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 384 –394. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330858. 
Krizhevsky, A., & Hinton, G. (2009). Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.  
Technical Report TR -2009, University of Toronto, Toronto.  
https://doi.org/10.24432/C5889J. 
Kumar, R., Naik, S. M., Naik, V. D., Shiralli, S., Sunil, V., & Husain, M. (2015). Predicting clicks: 
CTR estimation of advertisements using logistic regression classifier. In 2015 IEEE 
International Advance Computing Conference (IACC  ’15). 1134–1138, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IADCC.2015.7154880. 
Lee, D., Kang, S., Ju, H., Park, C., & Yu, H. (2021). Bootstrapping user and item representations 
for one-class collaborative filtering. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’21). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 317–326. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3404835.3462935. 
Li, D., Hu, B., Chen, Q., Wang, X., & Liu, H. (2021a). Attentive capsule network for click-through 
rate and conversion rate prediction in online advertising. Knowledge -Based Systems, 211, 
106522. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2020.106522. 
Li, H., Sang, L., Zhang, Y., & Zhang, Y. (2024 a). SimCEN: Simple contrast -enhanced network 
for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on 
Multimedia (ACM-MM ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
2311–2320. https://doi.org/10.1145/3664647.3681203. 
Li, Honghao, Sang, L., Zhang, Y., Zhang, X., & Zhang, Y. (2024 b). CETN: Contrast -enhanced 
through network for click -through rate prediction. ACM Transactions on Information 
Systems (TOIS), 34(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/3688571. 
Li, P., Li, R., Da, Q., Zeng, A.-X., & Zhang, L. (2020a). Improving multi-scenario learning to rank 
in e-commerce by exploiting task relationships in the label space. In Proceedings of the 29th 
ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management  (CIKM ’20). 
Association f or Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2605–2612. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3340531.3412713. 
Li, Xiaochen, Liang, J., Liu, X., & Zhang, Y. (2022). Adversarial filtering modeling on long-term 
user behavior sequences for click -through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 45th 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval (SIGIR ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1969–
1973. https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.3531788. 
Li, Xiang, Wang, C., Ta n, J., Zeng, X., Ou, D., Ou, D., & Zheng, B. (2020 b). Adversarial 
multimodal representation learning for click -through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 
Web Conference 2020 (WWW ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 827–836. https://doi.org/10.1145/3366423.3380163. 
Li, Zeyu, Cheng, W., Chen, Y., Chen, H., & Wang, W. (2020 c). Interpretable click-through rate 
prediction through hierarchical attention. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference 
on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, 313–321. https://doi.org/10.1145/3336191.3371785. 
Li, Z.K., Cui, Z.Y., Wu, S., Zhang, X.Y., & Wang, L. (2019). Fi -GNN: modeling feature 
interactions via graph neural networks for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM 
54 
 
International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’19). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 539 –548. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.3357951. 
Li, Z., Wu, S., Cui, Z., & Zhang, X. (2021b). GraphFM: graph factorization machines for feature 
interaction modeling. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2105.11866. 
Lian, J., Zhou, X., Zhang, F., Chen, Z., Xie, X., & Sun, G. (2018). XDeepFM: Combining explicit 
and implicit feature interactions for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’18). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1754 –1763. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220023. 
Lin, S.,  Hilton, J., & Evans, O. (2021). Truthful QA: Measuring how models mimic human 
falsehoods. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics (ACL ’21). 3214–3252. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.229. 
Liu, C., Shi, L., Wang, P., Teng, F., Jiang, X., Peng, C., Lin, Z., & Shao, J. (2023). Loss 
harmonizing for multi-scenario CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference 
on Recommender Systems (RecSys ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 195–199. https://doi.org/10.1145/3604915.3608865. 
Liu, M., Zheng, D., Li, J., Hu, Z., Liu, L., & Ding, Y. (2024). An ensemble learning framework 
for click -through rate prediction based on a reinforcement learning algorithm with 
parameterized actions. Knowledge -Based Systems, 283, 111152.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2023.111152. 
Liu, Q., Yu, F., Wu, S., & Wang, L. (2015). A Convolutional click prediction model. In 
Proceedings of the 24th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge 
Management (CIKM ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 
1743–1746. https://doi.org/10.1145/2806416.2806603. 
Liu, W., Tang, R., Li, J., Yu, J., Guo, H., He, X., & Zhang, S. (2018). Field -aware probabilistic 
embedding neural network for CTR prediction. In 12th ACM Conference on Recommender 
Systems (RecSys ’18). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 412 –
416. https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240396. 
Ma, J., Zhao, Z., Yi, X., Chen, J., Hong, L., & Chi, E. H. (2018). Modeling task relationships in 
multi-task learning with multi-gate mixture-of-experts. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining  (KDD ’18). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA , 1930 –1939. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3219819.3220007. 
Mao, K., Zhu, J., Su, L., Cai, G., Li, Y., & Dong, Z. (2023). FinalMLP: An enhanced two-stream 
MLP model for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI ’23), 37(4), 4552–4560. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i4.25577. 
Min, E., Luo, D., Lin, K., Huang, C., & Liu, Y. (2023). Scenario -adaptive feature interaction for 
Click-Through Rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGIR ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, 
New York, NY, USA, 4661–4672. https://doi.org/10.1145/3580305.3599936. 
Mordor Intelligence, 2024, Online Advertising Market Size - Industry Report on Share, Growth 
Trends & Forecasts Analysis (2024 -2029), https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-
reports/online-advertising-market. 
55 
 
Niu, T., & Hou, Y. (2020). Density matrix based convolutional neural network for click -through 
rate prediction. In 2020 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big Data 
(ICAIBD ’20). 46–50. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAIBD49809.2020.9137448. 
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., 
Slama, K., Ray, A., Schulman, J., Hilton, J. , Kelton, F., Miller, L., Simens, M., Askell, A., 
Welinder, P., Christiano, P. F. , Leike, J., & Lowe, R.  (2022). Training language models to 
follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems (NIPS), 27730–27744. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3600270.3602281. 
Pan, J., Xu, J., sRuiz, A.L., Zhao, W., Pan, S., Sun, Y., & Lu, Q. (2018). Field -weighted 
factorization machines for click-through rate prediction in display advertising. In Proceedings 
of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference (WWW ’18).  International World Wide Web 
Conferences Steering Committee, Republic and Canton of Geneva, CHE, 1349 –1357. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3178876.3186040. 
Qin, J., Zhang, W., Wu, X., Jin, J., Fang, Y., & Yu, Y. (2020). User behavior retrieval for click -
through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 43rd International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’20). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2347–2356. https://doi.org/10.1145/3397271.3401440. 
Qiu, X., Zuo, Y., & Liu, G. (2018). ETCF: An ensemble model for CTR prediction. In 2018 15th 
International Conference on Service Systems and Service Mana gement (ICSSSM  ’18). 
Hangzhou, China, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSSSM.2018.8465044. 
Qiu, Z., Zhu, J., Chen, Y., Cai, G., Liu, W., Dong, Z., & King, I. (2024). EASE: Learning 
lightweight semantic feature adapters from Large Language Models for CTR predi ction. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge 
Management (CIKM ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  
4819–4827. https://doi.org/10.1145/3627673.3680048. 
Qu, Y., Cai, H., Ren, K., Zhang, W., Yu, Y., Wen, Y., & Wang, J. (2016). Product -based neural 
networks for user response prediction. In 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data 
Mining (ICDM ’16). 1149–1154. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM.2016.0151. 
Qu, Y., Fang, B., Zhang, W., Tang, R., Niu, M., Guo, H., Yu, Y., & He, X. (2018). Product-based 
neural networks for user response prediction over multi -field categorical data. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 37(1), 1–35. https://doi.org/10.1145/3233770. 
Rendle, S. (2010). Factorization machines. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE International 
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM ’10). IEEE Computer Society, USA, 995 –1000, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDM.2010.127. 
Sang, L., Li, H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., & Yang, Y. ( 2024). AdaGIN: Adaptive graph interaction 
network for click -through rate prediction. ACM Transactions on Information Systems  
(TOIS), 43(1). https://doi.org/10.1145/3681785.  
Shi, H.-J.M., Mudigere, D., Naumov, M., & Yang, J.Y. (2020). Compositional embeddings using 
complementary partitions for memory-efficient recommendation systems. In Proceedings of 
the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining 
(KDD ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 165 –175. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403059. 
Song, W., Shi, C., Xiao, Z., Duan, Z., Xu, Y., Zhang, M., & Tang, J. (2019). Auto Int: Automatic 
feature interaction learning via self -attentive neural networks. In Proceedings of the 28th 
56 
 
ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’19). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  1161–1170. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.3357925. 
Statista, 2024, Online advertising revenue in the U.S. 2000 -2023, Access on Apr 18, 20 24, 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/183816/us-online-advertisingrevenue-since-2000. 
Sun, Y., Pan, J., Zhang, A., & Flores, A. (2021). FM2: Field -matrixed factorization machines for 
recommender systems. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 (WWW  ’21). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2828 –2837. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3442381.3449930. 
Sui, Y., Wang, X., Wu, J., Lin, M., He, X., & Chua, T. S. (2022). Causal attention for interpretable 
and generalizable graph classification. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference 
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD  ’22). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1696–1705. https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539366. 
Tang, H., Liu, J., Zhao, M., & Gong, X. (2020). Prog ressive Layered Extraction (PLE): A novel 
multi-task learning (MTL) model for personalized recommendations. In Proceedings of the 
14th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (RecSys ’20). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 269–278. https://doi.org/10.1145/3383313.3412236. 
Tao, Z., Wang, X., He, X., Huang, X., & Chua, T. -S. (2020). HoAFM: A High -order attentive 
factorization machine for CTR prediction. Information Processing & Management, 57(6), 
102076. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2019.102076. 
Tian, Z., Bai, T., Zhao, W. X., Wen, J.-R., & Cao, Z. (2023). EulerNet: Adaptive feature interaction 
learning via Euler’s formula for CTR prediction. In Proceedings of the 46th International 
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 
’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1376–1385. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3539618.3591681. 
Wang, A., Pruksachatkun, Y., Nangia, N., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Bowman, S. (2019 a). 
Superglue: A stick ier benchmark for general -purpose language understanding systems. In 
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems  (NIPS), 32.  
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1905.00537. 
Wang, A., Singh, A., Michael, J., Hill, F., Levy, O., & Bowman, S. R. (2019b). Glue: A multi-task 
benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In 7th International 
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR  ’19). https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/W18-
5446. 
Wang, C., Sun, J., Dong, Z., Li, R., & Zhang, R. (2023 a). Gradient matching for categorical data 
distillation in CTR prediction. Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Recommender 
Systems (RecSys ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 161–
170. https://doi.org/10.1145/3604915.3608769. 
Wang, D., Yan, S., Xia, Y., Salamatian, K., Deng, W., & Zhang, Q. (2022 a). Learning 
supplementary NLP features for CTR prediction in sponsored search. In Proceedings of the 
28th ACM  SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’2 2). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  4010–4020. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539064. 
Wang, F., Wang, Y., Li, D., Gu, H., Lu, T., Zhang, P., & Gu, N. (2022 b). Enhancing CTR 
prediction with context -aware feature representation learning. In Proceedings of the 45th 
57 
 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information 
Retrieval (SIGIR ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA , 343–
352. https://doi.org/10.1145/3477495.3531970. 
Wang, F., Gu, H., Li, D.,  Lu, T., Zhang, P., & Gu, N. (2023 b). Towards deeper, lighter and 
interpretable cross network for ctr prediction. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (CIKM ’23) . Association for 
Computing Machiner y, New York, NY, USA, 2523–2533. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3583780.3615089. 
Wang, F., Wang, Y., Li, D., Gu, H., Lu, T., Zhang, P., & Gu, N. (2023 c). Cl4CTR: A contrastive 
learning framework for ctr prediction. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM International 
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM ’ 23). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 805–813. https://doi.org/10.1145/3539597.3570372. 
Wang, K., Wang, H., Guo, W., Liu, Y., Lin, J., Lian, D., & Chen, E. (2025). DLF: Enhancing 
explicit-implicit interaction via dynamic low-order-aware fusion for CTR prediction. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.19182. 
Wang, R., Fu, B., Fu, G., & Wang, M. (2017). Deep & cross network for ad click predictions. In 
Proceedings of the ADKDD’17 (ADKDD ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, Article 12, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/3124749.3124754. 
Xi, Y., Liu, W., Lin, J., Cai, X., Zhu, H., Zhu, J., Chen, B., Tang, R., Zhang, W., & Yu, Y. (2024). 
Towards open-world recommendation with knowledge augmentation from Large Language 
Models. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems  (RecSys 
’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 12–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3640457.3688104. 
Xia, B., Wang, X., Yamasaki, T., Aizawa, K., & Seshime, H. (2019). Deep neural network-based 
click-through rate prediction using multimodal features of online banners. In 2019 IEEE fifth 
International Conference on Multimedia Big Data (BigMM  ’19). 162–170. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/BigMM.2019.00-29. 
Xiao, J., Ye, H., He, X., Zhang, H., Wu, F., & Chua, T.S. (2017). Attentional factorization 
machines: learning the weight of feature interactions via attention networks. In Proceedings 
of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI ’17). AAAI Press, 
3119–3125. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1708.04617. 
Xiao, F., Deng, L., Chen, J., Ji, H., Yang, X., Ding, Z., & Long, B. (2022). From abstract to details: 
A generative multimodal fusion framework for recommendation. In Proceedings of the 30th 
ACM International Conference on Multimedia  (MM ’2 2). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 258–267. https://doi.org/10.1145/3503161.3548366. 
Xie, Y., Jiang, D., Wang, X., & Xu, R. (2019). Robust transfer integrated locally kernel embedding 
for click -through rate prediction. Information Scie nces, 491, 190 –203. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.04.006. 
Xu, L., Skoularidou, M., Cuesta-Infante, A., & Veeramachaneni, K. (2019). Modeling tabular data 
using conditional GAN. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 32. 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1907.00503. 
Xue, T., Yang, Y., Zhai, P. (2025). Conversion rate prediction in online advertising: modeling 
techniques, performance evaluation and future directions. Just Accepted (October 2025). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2025.104450. 
58 
 
 
Yang, Q., Ongpin, M., Nikolenko, S., Huang, A., & Farseev, A. (2023 a). Against opacity: 
Explainable ai and large language models for effective digital advertising. In Proceedings of 
the 31st ACM international conference on multimedia (MM ’23). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 9299–9305. https://doi.org/10.1145/3581783.3612817. 
Yang, H., Wang, T., Tang, X., Li, Q., Shi, Y., Jiang, S., Yu, H., & Song, H . (2021). Multi -task 
learning for bias-free joint CTR prediction and market price modeling in online advertising. 
In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge 
Management (CIKM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  
2291–2300. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482373. 
Yang, H., Zhu, Y., & He, J. (2017). Local algorithm for user action prediction towards display 
ads. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 2091–2099. https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.3098089. 
Yang, Y., Chen, B., Zhu, C., Zhu, M., Dai, X., Guo, H., Zhang, M., Dong, Z., & Tang, R. (2024). 
AIE: Auction information enhanced framework for CTR prediction in online advertising. In 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems  (RecSys ’ 24). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  633–642. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3640457.3688136. 
Yang, Y., Xu, B., Shen, S., Shen, F., & Zhao, J. (2020). Operation-aware neural networks for user 
response prediction. Neural Networks, 121, 161 –168. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2019.09.020. 
Yang, Y., Zhao, K., Zeng, D. D., & Jansen, B. J. (2022 ). Time-varying effects of search engine 
advertising on sales –an empirical investigation in e -commerce. Decision Support Systems, 
163, 113843. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2022.113843.  
Yang, Y., Zhang, C., Zhao, K., & Wang, Q. (2023 b). The shifting role of information processing 
and management in interdiscipline development: From a collection of tools to a crutch? 
Information Processing & Management, 60 (4), 103388.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2023.103388.  
Yang, Y. , & Zhai, P. (2022). Click -through rate p rediction in online advertising: A literature 
review. Information Processing & Management, 59(2), 102853.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102853. 
Yuan, Z., Yuan, F., Song, Y., Li, Y., Fu, J., Yang, F., Pan, Y., & Ni, Y. (2023). Where to go next 
for recommender systems? ID - vs. modality-based recommender models revisited. In 
Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development 
in Information Retrieval  (SIGIR ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, 
NY, USA, 2639–2649. https://doi.org/10.1145/3539618.3591932. 
Zellers, R., Holtzman, A., Bisk, Y., Farhadi, A., & Choi, Y. (2019). Hellaswag: Can a machine 
really finish your sentence? https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1905.07830. 
Zhai, P., Yang, Y., & Zhang, C. (2023). Causality -based CTR prediction using graph neural 
networks. Information Processing & Management, 60(1), 103137.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2022.103137. 
59 
 
Zhai, P., Yang, Y., & Zhang, C. (2025). Periodic graph neural networks for click -through rate 
prediction in online advertising. ACM Transactions on Information Systems. Just Accepted 
(September 2025). https://doi.org/10.1145/3769103. 
Zhang, Hengyu, Pan, J., Liu, D., Jiang, J., & Li, X. (2024a). Deep pattern network for click-through 
rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 47th international ACM SIGIR Conference on Research 
and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR ’ 24). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1189–1199. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626772.3657777. 
Zhang, H., Yan, J., & Zhang, Y. (2020). An attention -based deep network for CTR prediction. In 
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Machine Learning and Computing 
(ICMLC ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1 –5. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3383972.3383991. 
Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Srinivasan, B., Shen, Z., Qin, X., Faloutsos, C., Rangwala, H., & Karypis, 
G. (2024b). Mixed-type tabular data synthesis with score-based diffusion in latent space. The 
12th International Conference on Learning Representations  (ICLR ’24). 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.09656. 
Zhang, Q., Liao, X., Liu, Q., Xu, J., & Zheng, B. (2022). Leaving no one behind: A multi-scenario 
multi-task meta learning approach for advertiser modeling. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth 
ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining  (WSDM ’22). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  1368–1376. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3488560.3498479. 
Zhang, X., Wang, Z., Du, B., Wu, J., Zhang, X., & Meng, E. (2024c). Deep session heterogeneity-
aware network for Click Through Rate prediction. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and 
Data Engineering, 36(12), 7927–7939. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2024.3421594. 
Zhao, W. X., Mu, S., Hou, Y., Lin, Z., Chen, Y., Pan, X., et al. (2021). RecBole: Towards a unified, 
comprehensive and efficient framework for recommendation algorithms.  In Proceedings of 
the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management (CIKM 
’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,  4653–4664. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482016. 
Zhao, W., Zhang, J., Xie, D., Qian, Y., Jia, R., & Li, P. (2019). AIBox: CTR prediction model 
training on a single node. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on 
Information and Knowledge Management  (CIKM ’19). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 319–328. https://doi.org/10.1145/3357384.3358045. 
Zheng, L., Chiang, W. -L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y., Others. (2023). Judging 
LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and chatbot arena. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems (NIPS), 36, 46595–46623. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2306.05685. 
Zhou, G., Mou, N., Fan, Y., Pi, Q., Bian, W., Zhou, C., Zhu, X., & Gai, K. (2019). Deep interest 
evolution network for click-through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI  ’19). 33(01), 5941 –5948. 
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33015941. 
Zhou, G., Zhu, X., Song, C., Fan, Y., Zhu, H., Ma, X., Yan, Y., Jin, J., Li, H., & Gai, K. (2018). 
Deep interest network for click -through rate prediction. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD ’18). 
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1059 –1068. https://doi.org 
/10.1145/3219819.3219823. 
60 
 
Zhu, F., Zhong, M., Yang, X., Li, L., Yu, L., Zhang, T., Zhou, J., Chen, C., Wu, F., Liu , G., & 
Wang, Y. (2023). DCMT: A direct entire-space causal multi-task framework for post-click 
conversion estimation. In 2023 IEEE 39th International Conference on Data Engineering 
(ICDE ’23), 3113–3125. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE55515.2023.00239. 
Zhu, J., Liu, J., Yang, S., Zhang, Q., & He, X. (2021). Open benchmarking for click -through rate 
prediction. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & 
Knowledge Management (CIKM ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 
USA, 2759–2769. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482486. 
  
61 
 
Appendix for “Toward a benchmark for CTR prediction in online 
advertising: datasets, evaluation protocols and perspectives” 
Shan Gao1, Yanwu Yang1 
1School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 43004, China, 
{gaoshan.isec, yangyanwu.isec}@gmail.com 
 
A.1 List of abbreviations 
Table A1. List of abbreviations used in this paper. 
Abbreviations Full term 
ACN Attentive Capsule Network 
AFM Attentional Factorization Machine 
AFN Adaptive Factorization Network 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
ARC AI2 Reasoning Challenge 
AUC-PR Area Under Precision Recall Curve 
AUC-ROC Area Under ROC Curve 
AutoInt Automatic Feature Interaction Learning 
BAHE Behavior Aggregated Hierarchical Encoding 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CCPM Convolutional Click Prediction Model 
CIFAR Canadian Institute for Advanced Research 
CIN Compressed Interaction Network 
CNN Convolutional Neural Network 
COPC Click Over Predicted Click 
CTR Click-Through Rate 
CVR Conversion Rate 
DCN Deep&Cross Network 
DeepFM Factorization-Machine based Neural Network 
DeepGBM Deep Learning Framework Distilled by GBDT 
DIEN Deep Interest Evolution Network 
DMCNN Density Matrix-Based Convolutional Neural Network 
DNN Deep Neural Network 
DSP Demand-Side Platform 
EDA Exploratory Data Analysis 
ETCF Ensemble Trees and Cascading Forests 
FFM Field-aware Factorization Machine 
FiBiNET Feature Importance and Bilinear feature Interaction NETwork 
Field-ECE Field-level Expected Calibration Error 
Field-RCE Field-level Relative Calibration Error 
FiGNN Feature Interaction Graph Neural Networks 
FinalMLP Feature Selection and Interaction Aggregation Layers on Top of Two MLP 
FM Factorization Machine 
FmFM Field-matrixed Factorization Machine 
FN False Negative 
FP False Positive 
62 
 
FPR False Positive Rate 
FwFM Field-weighted Factorization Machine 
GBDT Gradient Boosting Decision Tree 
gcForest Multi-grained Cascade Forest 
GCN Gated Cross Network 
GDCN Gated Deep Cross Network 
GLUE General Language Understanding Evaluation 
GNN Graph Neural Network 
GraphFM Graph Factorization Machine 
HCCM Hybrid CNN based Attention with Category Prior Module 
HellaSwag Harder Endings, Longer contexts, and Low-shot Activities for Situations With 
Adversarial Generations 
HoAFM High-order Attentive Factorization Machine 
InterHAt Interpretable CTR prediction model with Hierarchical Attention 
KLD Kullback-Leibler Divergence 
LLM Large Language Model 
LoRA Low-Rank Adaptation 
LR Logistic Regression 
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory 
MCC Matthews Correlation Coefficient 
MLP Multi-Layer Perceptron 
MLLM Multi-modal Large Language Model 
MSE Mean Square Error 
MT-bench Multi-Turn Benchmark 
NFM Neural Factorization Machine 
ONN Operation-aware Neural Networks 
OOV Out-of-V ocabulary 
PNN Product-based Neural Network 
Poly2 Degree-2 Polynomial Model 
RelaImpr Relative Improvement 
RIG Relative Information Gain 
RL Reinforcement Learning 
RMSE Root Means Squared Error 
RNN Recurrent Neural Network 
ROC Curve Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve 
SENET Squeeze-Excitation network 
SMOTE Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique 
SSDs Solid-State Drives 
TN True Negative 
TP True Positive 
TPR True Positive Rate 
TV AE Tabular Variational AutoEncoder 
Uni-CTR Unified Framework for Multi-Domain CTR Prediction 
VR Virtual Reality 
xDeepFM eXtreme Deep Factorization Machine 
XGBoost eXtreme Gradient Boosting 
 
  
63 
 
A.2 Statistics on evaluation metric usage in CTR prediction literature 
Table A2. The number of articles using each evaluation metric per year in CTR prediction. 
Year Precision Recall Accuracy MCC AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
F1 
score RelaImpr Logloss MSE COPC KLD Field-
ECE 
Field-
RCE RMSE RIG Total 
articles 
2012 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 
2013 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 
2014 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 4 
2015 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 
2016 1 1 0 0 9 0 1 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 4 1 12 
2017 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 11 
2018 1 1 1 0 13 0 1 2 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 14 
2019 0 0 2 0 21 0 0 0 14 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 22 
2020 1 1 1 0 29 0 1 1 23 1 0 0 1 1 5 0 33 
2021 0 0 2 1 12 0 0 1 10 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 16 
2022 0 0 0 1 14 1 1 1 7 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 16 
2023 0 0 0 0 19 0 0 4 13 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 19 
2024 0 0 1 0 8 0 0 0 5 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 9 
 
  
64 
 
Table A3. The percentage of articles using each evaluation metric per year in CTR prediction. 
Year Precision Recall Accuracy MCC AUC-
ROC 
AUC-
PR 
F1 
score RelaImpr Logloss MSE COPC KLD Field-
ECE 
Field-
RCE RMSE RIG Total 
articles 
2012 0 0 0 0 0.50 0 0 0 0.25 0.50 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 
2013 0 0 0 0 1.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 
2014 0 0 0 0 0.50 0.25 0 0 0.25 0 0 0 0 0 0.25 0.50 4 
2015 0 0 0 0 0.67 0 0 0 0.33 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 
2016 0.08 0.08 0 0 0.75 0 0.08 0 0.50 0 0 0 0 0 0.33 0.08 12 
2017 0 0 0 0 0.82 0 0 0 0.55 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.09 11 
2018 0.07 0.07 0.07 0 0.93 0 0.07 0.14 0.50 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.07 14 
2019 0 0 0.09 0 0.95 0 0 0 0.64 0.05 0 0.05 0 0 0.05 0 22 
2020 0.03 0.03 0.03 0 0.88 0 0.03 0.03 0.70 0.03 0 0 0.03 0.03 0.15 0 33 
2021 0 0 0.12 0.06 0.75 0 0 0.06 0.62 0 0 0.06 0 0 0 0 16 
2022 0 0 0 0.06 0.88 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.44 0 0.12 0 0 0 0 0 16 
2023 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0.21 0.68 0 0 0 0.05 0 0 0.11 19 
2024 0 0 0.11 0 0.89 0 0 0 0.56 0 0.11 0 0 0 0 0 9 
 