Preprint. Under Review.
HOW DOESRL POST-TRAINING INDUCE
SKILL COMPOSITION? A CASESTUDY ONCOUNTDOWN
Simon Park∗, Simran Kaur ∗, Sanjeev Arora
Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University
{juhyunp,skaur,arora}@princeton.edu
ABSTRACT
While reinforcement learning (RL) successfully enhances reasoning in large lan-
guage models, its role in fostering compositional generalization (the ability to
synthesize novel skills from known components) is often conflated with mere
length generalization. To this end, we study what RL post-training teaches about
skill composition and how the structure of the composition affects the skill trans-
fer. We focus on the COUNTDOWNtask (given n numbers and a target, form an
expression that evaluates to the target) and analyze model solutions as expres-
sion trees, where each subtree corresponds to a reusable subtask and thus can be
viewed as a “skill.” Tracking tree shapes and their success rates over training,
we find: (i) out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization to larger n and to unseen
tree shapes, indicating compositional reuse of subtasks; (ii) a structure-dependent
hierarchy of learnability—models master shallow balanced trees (workload is bal-
anced between subtasks) before deep unbalanced ones, with persistent fragility
on right-heavy structures (even when the composition depth is the same as some
left-heavy structures). Our diagnostic reveals what is learned, in what order, and
where generalization fails, clarifying how RL-only post-training induces OOD
generalization beyond what standard metrics such as pass@k reveal. 1
1 INTRODUCTION
A key objective in training large language models (LLMs) is to develop robust reasoning abilities that
generalize to novel problem instances. Reinforcement learning (RL) is a widely adopted technique
for this purpose (Ouyang et al., 2022; Grattafiori et al., 2024; OpenAI et al., 2024; DeepSeek-AI
et al., 2025), yet the precise mechanism by which it improves reasoning remains poorly understood.
The prevailing hypotheses suggest that RL either sharpens the model’s probability distribution over
known reasoning paths (Huang et al., 2025; Yue et al., 2025) or encourages in-context exploration via
chaining in longer solution sequences (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Setlur et al., 2025). However, these
notions overlook a crucial aspect of intelligence: the ability to compose known skills in novel ways.
Current evaluations often conflate two fundamentally different modes of generalization. The first,
length generalization, is the ability to solve problems of greater sequential depth by iterating a known
algorithmic structure. The second,compositional generalization, is the ability to solve problems of a
fixed depth by synthesizing a novel algorithmic structure from familiar components. While complex
reasoning often involves both, we argue that a rigorous understanding requires operationalizing and
testing these two modes of generalization independently. Without a clear way to distinguish them, it
is difficult to ascertain the true algorithmic contribution of fine-tuning methods like RL.
To formalize this distinction and enable empirical investigation, a controlled setting is required. We
utilize the COUNTDOWN 2 task, which serves as a clean testbed where the structure of a solution is
isomorphic to a binary expression tree. This allows for an unambiguous, canonical representation of
the reasoning pattern used to solve a problem.
∗Equal contribution
1Source code can be found at the PLI GitHub codebase.
2COUNTDOWNis a task where given n integers and a target, the model needs to output an expression using
each integer once and operators {+,−,×,÷} that attains the target. For example, given [4,3,2,2] and a target
16, one solution would be2×2×3 + 4 = 16.
1
arXiv:2512.01775v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
Preprint. Under Review.
This pattern framework allows us to move beyond a monolithic view of the solution to a nuanced
skill-based view. Solving a complex pattern like A×(B−C/D) requires a composition of distinct
abilities:decomposition skillsto identify how to explore and correctly partition the solution (e.g.,
factor_identification: identifying the factors of the target to explore potential candidates)
and the recursivesub-problem skillsto solve the resulting sub-patterns (e.g., generating an expression
for B−C/D given the remaining three numbers and a modified target).3 The tree structure of the
pattern determines which atomic skills are combined, in what order, and how they are grouped.
By tracking the development of complex skills for each pattern during training, we probe two
fundamental questions: 1) To what extent does RL equip models with the ability for genuine
structural composition? and 2) How does the underlying compositional structure of a problem affect
its learnability?
We summarize our main contributions:
• Pattern framework.We introduce a framework for disentangling length and compositional
generalization (Section 2).
• Models generalize to larger puzzle sizes.Base models (1B-7B) trained on patterns from
n= 3,4 generalize to n= 5,6 , where skills for smaller patterns need to be recombined to
solve the puzzles (Section 4.1).
• Pattern structure determines difficulty.Within the same input length n, we observe a clear
hierarchy of learnability based on the structure of the pattern: shallow balanced structures
(with equal amount of “workload” across subtasks) are easier than deep unbalanced structures
(Section 4.2). Within the same depth, right-heavy trees, which require committing to a plan
ahead of the complex subroutine appearing later, are particularly hard (Section 4.3).
• Models generalize to unseen patterns, signaling compositional reuse.When a particular
n= 3 pattern was removed from training, 1.5B model can reconstruct the pattern and its
higher-order extensions (Section 4.4).
Overall, our findings show that RL post-training imparts length generalization and partial compo-
sitional generalization, with difficulty governed primarily by compositional structure. This result
motivates targeted curriculum design as a promising direction for future work. We hypothesize
that during RL post-training, once early generalization gains appear, introducing a minimal set of
structurally hard, near-frontier examples could offer a more sample-efficient method for pushing the
model’s reasoning capabilities.
2 METHODOLOGY: A STRUCTURALFRAMEWORKTODISENTANGLELENGTH
ANDCOMPOSITIONALGENERALIZATION
Standard metrics for reasoning, such aspass@k,response length, ornumber of attemptsoffer an
incomplete picture of a model’s capabilities. They fail to distinguish between a model’s ability to
iterate a known procedure and the more formidable challenge of synthesizing a novel one. To address
this, we introduce a formal framework that disentangles these phenomena by analyzing the underlying
computational structure of arithmetic solutions, which we apply to the COUNTDOWNtask.
2.1 CANONICALPATTERNS OFREASONING
We define anatomic skillas the application of a single binary operator from {+,−,×,÷} . Then the
ability to solve a COUNTDOWNpuzzle with an arithmetic expression requires askill composition.
By replacing numbers with placeholder symbols, an arithmetic expression can be abstracted (e.g.,
9/3 + 1→A/B+C) and parsed into a binary tree, which provides insights into how the atomic skills
are combined.
To ensure that syntactically different but algorithmically identical expressions (e.g.,(A+B) +C and
C+ (A+B) are treated as a single computational procedure, we apply a principled normalization
process that maps them to a unique canonicalpattern(Figure 1). This process, detailed in Section A.1,
3The atomic skills would be mastering the four operators:a+b,a−b,a×b, anda÷b.
2
Preprint. Under Review.
resolves ambiguities arising from properties like commutativity and associativity, allowing us to
analyze the underlying computational graph and distinguish a simple iterative structure like A+B+
C+Dfrom a complex, nested one likeA/(B−C/D).
We classify the structure of a computational pattern by its shape signature [x]◦[y] , denoting the root
operator ◦ and the number of leaf operandsx and y in its left and right sub-trees. This partitioning into
left-heavy (x > y), balanced (x≈y ), and right-heavy (x < y) structures correlates with synthesis
difficulty (see Figure 6). For instance, to generate a right-heavy pattern likeA/(B−C/D) (signature
[1]÷[3] ), a model cannot greedily select the root operator; it must first look ahead to the complex
sub-expression(B−C/D)and recognize its utility within the broader computation.
×
÷
Inputs: {8,9,3,2} 
Target: 14 
8 + (2 × 9) ÷ 3 
+
8
2 9
3 
+
Parse Operator Tree Canonical PatternNormalize 
×
÷
9
3
8
2
+
÷
B
C
D
×
A
Task
Figure 1:From generated expression to canonicalpattern.The model-generated expression
8 + (2×9)÷3 is parsed into an expression tree, normalized with respect to algebraic identities,
and mapped to the unique canonical pattern A×B÷C+D . Patterns are then grouped by their
computational shape. Here, the root operator is “ +”, with a left sub-expression over three leaves
(A, B, C)and a right sub-expression over one leaf(D). The signature[3] + [1]serves as a compact
representation of the pattern’s structure at the root-level.
2.2 DISENTANGLINGMODES OFGENERALIZATION
A primary contribution of our framework is its ability to formally disentangle two distinct and
often-conflated axes of skill composition. We definelength generalizationas the ability to generalize
to larger problem sizes than those seen during training, which typically requires using more atomic
skills. We definecompositional generalizationas the ability to synthesize novel combinations of
known atomic skills at problem sizes that remain within the training range.
For example, in COUNTDOWN, training on one puzzle size n and evaluating on a larger puzzle size
N > ncan measure length generalization, whereas training on a subset of patterns in a puzzle size n
and evaluating on some heldout set of patterns in the same puzzle size n can measure compositional
generalization.
Our framework also allows a deeper analysis into the effect of compositional structure on gener-
alization. While some works (Yuan et al., 2025) may treat composition simply as a sequential
application (“chaining”) of atomic skills where problem size always coincides with compositional
depth, skill compositions can happen in complex structures, where problem size alone cannot capture
the difficulty level.
2.3 CONTROLLING FORDISTRIBUTIONALBIAS INDATASETGENERATION
A rigorous analysis of structural difficulty requires that the distribution of problem types be controlled.
Standard approach for creating COUNTDOWNdatasets (Pan et al., 2025b; Gandhi et al., 2024;
Stojanovski et al., 2025) proceeds as follows: 1) choose a random binary tree; 2) choose random
operators, numbers; 3) then filter for valid expressions that evaluate to an integer in [1,99] . This
introduces severe distributional biases, creating a confounding variable between a pattern’s frequency
and its intrinsic complexity. There are two problems with this design:
3
Preprint. Under Review.
Ƙ
Train T est Train T est
Length Generalization Compositional Generalization
Figure 2:Illustration of length and compositional generalization.While length and compositional
generalization are not mutually exclusive, they measure different abilities. A study of length gen-
eralization focuses solely on the number of skills, whereas a study of compositional generalization
requires an analysis of the compositional structure.
• Structural bias. + and × are commutative and associative, and many expressions involving
the two operators may have the same underlying pattern and have a higher probability
of being generated. For instance, the same A+B+C+D puzzle can be generated in
4!×C 3 = 120ways (e.g., ((1 + 2) + 3) + 4and 1 + (4 + (3 + 2))), whereas an asymmetric
pattern likeA/(B−C/D)only has one expression.
• Selection bias.The second, more severe bias stems from the common practice of filtering
for solutions that evaluate to an integer within a fixed range, such as [1,99] . When random
inputs are drawn from the set range, + or − yields a result in this range approximately 50%
of the time, whereas × or ÷ do so only about 5% of the time. Consequently, each × or ÷ is
approximately10×more unlikely to appear in an expression.
These two biases together produce a skewed dataset where aggregate performance metrics are
dominated by a model’s ability on simple, additive patterns. To eliminate this confounder, we
designed a different generation protocol. We generate examples by first selecting a target canonical
pattern and then sampling numbers that satisfy it. This enforces a near-uniform distribution over all
patterns, a methodological prerequisite for isolating and analyzing the true effect of compositional
structure on reasoning difficulty. See Section A.2 for more details.
3 EXPERIMENTALSETUP
3.1 TRAINING
We finetune Qwen-2.5 models (1.5B, 3B, and 7B) (Qwen et al., 2025) with GRPO (Shao et al.,
2024) on problems of size n∈ {3,4}. Each rollout receives a reward of 0.1 for correctly formatting
the final expression and an additional reward of 0.9 if the expression is correct and valid.4 We train
for one epoch across three seeds, saving checkpoints every 50 gradient updates and discarding any
unstable runs (see Section C.1). Full training details and results on other model families are available
in Sections A.2.3, A.3 and D.
3.2 EVALUATION
We evaluate each checkpoint by sampling k= 32 outputs per held-out question (temperature = 0.6),
with the maximum token length increasing for larger problem sizes (1024 for n∈ {3,4}, 2048 for
n= 5, and 4096 forn= 6). We then compute the following metrics on the extracted final answers:
• Pass@32 / All-correct@32:The fraction of questions where at least one (Pass@32), or all
(All-correct@32), of theksampled answers is correct
• Average Accuracy:The total number of correct answers across all questions and attempts,
divided by the total number of answers generated (i.e., number of questions×k).
• Pattern Coverage:The fraction of all possible canonical patterns that the model produces
at least once across the evaluation set (present).
4An expression isvalidif each of the n provided numbers is used exactly once and operators are restricted to
{+,−,×,÷}. An expression iscorrectif it evaluates to the target number.
4
Preprint. Under Review.
•Per-Pattern Precision:For any single pattern, this is the total number of correct solutions
using that pattern, divided by the total number of times the model produced that pattern as a
final answer across the entire evaluation set.
• High-Precision Coverage:The fraction of all possible canonical patterns for which the
model’sper-pattern precision(defined above) is at least80%(reliable). 5
4 MAINRESULTS
We first show that models achieve length generalization (Section 4.1), then demonstrate that this
success is fundamentally governed by the compositional structure of the task (Section 4.2). We
identify a “lookahead bottleneck” as the primary barrier to skill composition and provide definitive
evidence that RL enables the synthesis of entirely novel reasoning patterns (Section 4.4). Finally, we
isolate the effect of RL training by comparing against a supervised finetuning baseline (Section 4.5).
4.1 MODELSDEMONSTRATELENGTHGENERALIZATION
RL finetuning effectively teaches models to apply learned reasoning procedures to problems of greater
lengths than seen during training. Models trained only on n∈ {3,4} problems show substantial
accuracy improvements on held-outn= 5 puzzles (Figure 3) over the base model, with final Pass@32
reaching nearly 70% for the 1.5B model (Table 1). This generalization extends to n= 6 , where
models achieve Pass@32 around 40%. These results confirm that models successfully achievelength
generalization.
Table 1:Performance across model size.Averaged across all successful seeds 6(finalcheckpoints
for 1.5B/3B andbestcheckpoints for 7B). 7All-correct@32 (All), Average Accuracy (Avg), and
Pass@32 (Pass) on n=3,4 (trained) and n=5,6 (held out). Models learn n= 3,4 patterns almost
perfectly and generalize to larger puzzle sizes n= 5,6 , but the gap between Pass@32 and Average
Accuracy increases withn, signaling that the generalization is not perfect.
n=3n=4n=5n=6
Model All Avg Pass All Avg Pass All Avg Pass All Avg Pass
1.5B 0.98 1.00 1.00 0.63 0.83 0.94 0.13 0.36 0.68 0.00 0.09 0.36
3B 0.92 0.99 1.00 0.59 0.83 0.95 0.12 0.39 0.68 0.02 0.15 0.40
7B 0.99 1.00 1.00 0.66 0.88 0.98 0.15 0.46 0.75 0.02 0.15 0.39
Table 2:Per-pattern precision averaged by pattern structure on n=4.Averaged across all
successful seeds (finalcheckpoints for 1.5B/3B andbestcheckpoints for 7B). Averaged by (a) root
operator; (b) pattern with root operator −; (c) pattern with root operator ÷. Models struggle more
on −,÷ as the root operator. Shapes in the form of [1]−[3] or [1]÷[3] are particularly challenging.
Within each column, the highest number isboldfacedand the second highest number is underlined.
(a) by root operator
Operator 1.5B 3B 7B
+0.86 0.85 0.91
−0.83 0.80 0.86
×0.90 0.86 0.91
÷0.75 0.78 0.83
(b) by subtree shape (−)
Shape 1.5B 3B 7B
3 −1 0.81 0.78 0.84
2 −2 0.92 0.89 0.90
1 −3 0.73 0.76 0.86
(c) by subtree shape (÷)
Shape 1.5B 3B 7B
3 ÷1 0.77 0.77 0.83
2 ÷2 0.88 0.85 0.91
1 ÷3 0.61 0.76 0.80
5The 80% threshold checks if the model can execute a pattern with a reasonable reliability, but allows some
mistakes. The main findings are robust to reasonable variations of the threshold (70-90%). See Section G.
62 seeds for 1.5B/3B and 3 for 7B. Due to compute budget, we evaluate only 1 seed per model for n= 6.
See Section B.1 for the version with the standard deviation and the comparison against the base model.
77B models are over-trained before the end of 1 epoch of training. We select the checkpoint right before the
training reward declines. See Section B.1 for more details.
5
Preprint. Under Review.
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=3] [n=4] [n=5]
Figure 3:Successful length generalization, but a gap between pattern discovery and reliable
execution.We train Qwen2.5-1.5B on problem sizes n∈ {3,4}and evaluate on held-out data
for n∈ {3,4,5}.(Top)The model demonstrates stronglength generalization: accuracy on the
held-out n= 5 problems improves over the base model (leftmost data point).(Bottom)The model
also identifies almost all compositional patterns for n= 5 , but the ability to reliably execute the
correct pattern lags significantly behind its discovery. This indicates that the primary challenge for
generalization is procedural reliability, not abstract pattern identification.
4.2 COMPOSITIONALSTRUCTUREDETERMINESLEARNABILITY
However, the improvement in an aggregate accuracy masks the true determinant of difficulty. The
ability to generalize in length is fundamentally constrained by the compositional structure of the
pattern. This is evident in the out-of-distribution n= 5 evaluation in Figure 4, which reveals the
same hierarchy of difficulty seen on the training distribution (with n= 4 ): balanced patterns are
learned most readily, while right-heavy patterns remain the most challenging. This demonstrates that
compositional complexity, not problem length, is the primary predictor of reasoning difficulty, even
when generalizing to unseen lengths.
4.3 THE“LOOKAHEADBOTTLENECK” IS AFUNDAMENTALBARRIER TOSKILL
COMPOSITION
To isolate the effect of compositional structure while holding problem length constant, we analyze
performance on n= 4 puzzles. Our findings reveal a clear difficulty hierarchy that points to a
“lookahead bottleneck” as a fundamental challenge for autoregressive models.
Figure 4 (n= 4 column) shows that balanced patterns ([2]◦[2] ), which decompose a problem into
two equal subtasks, are mastered far more reliably than unbalanced ones. Crucially, right-heavy
patterns ([1]◦[3] ) are substantially harder to learn than left-heavy ( [3]◦[1] ) ones. To generate a
solution for a right-heavy pattern like A/(B−C/D) , the model must commit to the root operator
(÷) before generating the complex, three-term subroutine it applies to. This need to plan ahead for a
complex subsequent operation is the primary failure mode.
Table 2 quantifies this bottleneck across all model sizes: at the same depth of 3, [1]◦[3] generally
underperforms[3]◦[1], especially with the root operator÷and with smaller models.
6
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 4:Compositional structure (not input length) determines difficulty.Within n= 4 ,
balanced patterns ([2]◦[2] ; purple) are discovered (top row) and mastered more reliably (bottom row)
than the unbalanced ones (red/blue). Balanced patterns have shallow trees, with solution depth of 2
equal to that of n= 3 puzzles. Even when controlling for depth, right-heavy patterns ([1]◦[3] ; blue)
are harder than left-heavy patterns ([3]◦[1]; red). This evidence points to a “lookahead bottleneck,” the
challenge of committing to a solution ahead of a complex subroutine. The entire structural hierarchy
persists for n= 5. Results shown for a representative run of Qwen2.5-1.5B. See Section G for
equivalent plots for all other runs.
4.4 RL ENABLESSYNTHESIS OFNOVELPATTERNS, PROVIDINGEVIDENCEFOR
COMPOSITIONALGENERALIZATION
We next test for the strongest form of generalization: whether RL can enable a model to synthesize
a novel reasoning pattern it has never been explicitly trained on. We designed a rigorous held-out
experiment, removing the n= 3 pattern A/B+C and its entire family of n= 4 derivatives from
the training dataset (e.g.,A/B+C+D,A/(B+C) +D). See Section C.4 for the full list.
The results provide evidence for compositional generalization. Qwen2.5-1.5B trained on this
dataset successfully learns to generate the held-out patterns despite zero training exposure (Figures 5,
24 and 25). The learning dynamics also reveal: coverage first emerges on the simpler n= 3
subpattern before the model learns to compose it into its more complex n= 4 dependent forms.
This demonstrates that the model is not merely matching seen templates but is actively reusing
learned substructures to assemble novel operator-tree shapes, fulfilling our definition ofcompositional
generalization.
4.5 ISOLATING THEEFFECT OFRL
We additionally compare with Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT). To prepare the answer column, we
replace the placeholder symbols in the desired pattern with the correct list of numbers. For the
optional chain of thought text, we 1) randomly select an integer k∈[2, n] based on the puzzle
size n; 2) for each of k incorrect attempts, randomly choose a pattern different from the desired
pattern and replace the placeholder symbols with a randomly shuffled list of the input numbers; 3)
evaluate the expression and append “(Incorrect)”; 4) append the correct expression and append
“(Correct).” The CoT is explicitly designed to be random to remove any bias from hand-coded
heuristics. See Section B.2 for more details on the training and Section E for example prompts.
7
Preprint. Under Review.
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
heldout
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=3] [n=4] [n=5]
Figure 5:Generalizes to entire families of held-out compositional patterns.To evaluate composi-
tional generalization, we removed an entire family of related patterns from the training set: the base
n= 3 structure A/B+C and all of its n= 4 extensions (e.g., A/B+C+D , A/(B+C) +D ).
The model successfully recovers these unseen patterns. Coverage first emerges on the held-out n= 3
subpattern before generalizing to its more complex n= 4 dependents, matching the typical learning
hierarchy where presence precedes precision. This result demonstrates that the model can reuse
learned substructures to assemble novel operator-tree shapes it has never been explicitly trained on.
Final accuracies.Table 3 reports the final accuracies of Qwen2.5-1.5B trained with SFT. The
model performs better without the CoT, most likely because including the random patterns confuses
the model. But, SFT without CoT still underperforms RL and struggles to generalize to n= 5, with
Average Accuracy less than 10%. This suggests that the exploratory nature of RL is more effective
than the imitation-based approach of SFT, which struggles to generalize especially when the provided
data is too simple or poorly structured. Nonetheless, the learning dynamics of SFT can isolate the
order of skill acquisition without access to the model’s own exploration and skill composition.
SFT exhibits different learning dynamics by pattern structure.The model trained without CoT
fails to reliably learn most n= 4 patterns. To probe the order in which the model learns the patterns
to an intermediate level, we instead relax the threshold of high-precision to 50% (Figure 9). Even
though the coverage of patterns for n= 5 patterns decrease in a similar order as in RL: right-heavy >
left-heavy > balanced, the model instead mastersn= 4 patterns (in-distribution) in the exact opposite
order: right-heavy < left-heavy < balanced. This highlights that the clear hierarchy of difficulty
caused by the subtree structure is inherent to the RL training.
5 ABLATIONS
In Section C, we run ablations on the different part of the training pipeline. Small models often find a
formatting-only shortcut, but increasing the group size initially mitigates the instability (Section C.1).
Normalizing by the standard deviation in the group advantage leads to longer responses and a lower
final performance (Section C.2); increasing the number of rollouts may improve stability but leads
to a lower final performance (Section C.3); models require harder and a diverse set of patterns to
escape the formatting-only shortcut (Section C.4); models trained without a random subset of patterns
can still generalize to unseen patterns and larger pattern sizes (Section C.4); training with PPO may
improve All-correct@32 but hurts Pass@32 (Section C.5).
8
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 3:Final performance of SFT-trained models.All-correct@32 (All), Average Accuracy
(Avg), and Pass@32 (Pass) on n=3,4 (trained) and n=5 (held out). We present the performance of
the base model and the GRPO-trained model as a basis for comparison.
n=3n=4n=5
Training All Avg Pass All Avg Pass All Avg Pass
Base Model 0.00 0.02 0.42 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02
GRPO 0.98 1.00 1.00 0.63 0.83 0.94 0.13 0.36 0.68
SFT+No CoT 0.31 0.65 0.92 0.05 0.38 0.82 0.00 0.09 0.33
SFT+Random CoT 0.01 0.15 0.59 0.00 0.03 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.04
6 RELATEDWORKS
Skill composition in LLMsArora and Goyal (2023) establish a theoretical foundation for the
emergence of skill composition in LLMs, and Yu et al. (2024) benchmark the ability of the models
to compose skills. Regarding how to elicit skill composition, previous works focus mainly on pre-
training and supervised fine-tuning: Chen et al. (2023) propose optimizing data ordering, whereas
other works investigate in-context prompting (Chen et al., 2024) and supervised fine-tuning (Zhao
et al., 2024). This work extends the analysis of skill composition to the RL post-training stage.
Length and compositional generalizationPrevious works (Anil et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024;
Lee et al., 2025) study the ability of LLMs to generalize to a sequence length longer than seen during
training. More broadly, recent papers DeepSeek-AI et al. (2025); Setlur et al. (2025) claim that RL
helps models generalize to more difficult problems by encouraging more attempts, considering length
as a proxy for difficulty. Sun et al. (2025) study the ability of RL to teach LLMs to compose skills,
but they consider the number of skills combined as a proxy for task complexity, still conflating length
and compositional generalization. Concurrent with our work, Yuan et al. (2025) also show that RL
can induce compositional ability and report the need for a metric beyond pass@k, but their definition
is limited to compositional depth, which again coincides with length. Our work instead proposes a
framework to analyze the structure behind each skill as an abstract tree, which allows us to diagnose
how the complexity of a task is determined by the compositional structure, not just its length or depth.
Sharpening vs discovery and pass@k.Previous works (Yue et al., 2025; Dang et al., 2025)
often use the metric of pass@k to label the effect of post-training as eithersharpening(Huang
et al., 2025)—concentrating probability on pre-existing good paths—ordiscovery—acquiring new
knowledge. While useful, trajectory-level metrics like pass@k are too coarse to provide detailed
insight into model behavior. Our work focuses on the learning dynamics, which are compatible
with both possibilities. Instead of concluding whether RL is introducing a new type of reasoning or
resurfacing it, we focus more on skill composition:howandin which orderit happens.
COUNTDOWNand the game of 24.Prior works (Yao et al., 2023; Gandhi et al., 2024; Herr
et al., 2025; Ni et al., 2025) consider COUNTDOWN, and its variant Game of 24, as a testbed for
model reasoning due to its clean structure. They mainly focus on optimizing inference-time search
or training on heuristics-based search traces, but these approaches can make it difficult to identify
which skills acquired versus which are a part of the search algorithm / heuristics. By contrast, our
work focuses onnatural RLon COUNTDOWN—no handcrafted search heuristics or specialized
decoding—so the only signal is the natural task reward. This design lets us attribute behavioral
changes directly to RL and to analyze them with the pattern framework.
Design choices in RL training.RL training is sensitive to algorithmic choices. The loss function in
GRPO (Shao et al., 2024) involves multiple terms, including group-level advantage normalization, KL
regularization, and gradient clipping. Follow-up works (Liu et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025; Shrivastava
et al., 2025) analyze the effect of these choices; for example, arguing that removing standard-deviation
normalization can improve stability and avoid biases toward easy prompts. Our work complements
these works by providing additional empirical observations on the effect of the design choices in RL.
9
Preprint. Under Review.
Skill composition in classical RLIn classical RL, a skill is defined in the framework of options
(Sutton et al., 1999; Barto and Mahadevan, 2003). These works view skill composition as a sequential
application of individual skills, which aligns with our definition of length generalization. On the
other hand, other works (Todorov, 2009) define skill composition as the ability to learn a single
behavior that can solve multiple objectives via a combined value function, which would be considered
compositional generalization in our definition. While these frameworks are defined at the MDP level,
the present work follows the norm in the LLM literature and defines skills at the task level, defined on
the generated outputs of the model. See Mendez and Eaton (2023) for a survey of skill compositions
in classical RL.
7 DISCUSSION ANDFUTUREWORK
Our work studies the acquisition of skill composition during RL. On natural data, compositional
complexity is confounded with length, making it impossible to isolate true failure modes. A synthetic
testbed is therefore methodologically essential to control for these confounders and identify drivers
of reasoning failure. Thus, the COUNTDOWNtask introduces a formal lens through which to analyze
the acquisition of compositional skills. By representing solutions as computational trees, we can
disentangle the effects of a problem’s length from its underlying compositional structure. This
decomposition reveals a fundamental insight: the primary barrier to learning complex reasoning are
not length-based but structural. Models do not fail simply because a task is long; they fail when its
compositional form creates specific bottlenecks.
Our analysis reveals that problems decomposable into balanced sub-problems are learned most readily.
In contrast, those requiring deep-sequential commitments (particularly “right-heavy” structures that
demand significant lookahead before executing a complex subroutine) constitute a fundamental
bottleneck for autoregressive models; crucially, these right-heavy structures are often harder than
left-heavy ones, despite having the same compositional depth. This demonstrates that a task’s
compositional structure, rather than merely its size, is what dictates learnability. This finding should
be understood not as an artifact of our task, but as highlighting a plausible explanation of where
difficulty in extending beyond the reasoning boundary arises. Our results suggest that the inherent
challenge is tied to the structure of skill composition itself, not to incidental features of the data.
This structural view of difficulty likely extends to other domains–such as program synthesis, multi-
step tool use, and theorem proving–where solutions can be represented as computation or proof trees.
In such settings, structural properties (balance, depth, and lookahead/sequential dependencies) may
predict difficulty. We argue that the overall sample complexity of learning skill composition is not
monolithic; instead, it is dominated by the challenge of mastering these structurally-hard instances.
This insight points to curriculum design as a promising direction for future work. We hypothesize
that, once RL post-training yields signs of length and some compositional generalization, dynamically
augmenting the training distribution with a minimal set of structurally hard instances may further
advance the model’s capability frontier. Verifying this hypothesis and developing such curricula
remain a crucial direction for future work.
8 LIMITATIONS
The scope of the paper is limited to COUNTDOWN; we do not evaluate on other reasoning or
compositional tasks. We consider generalization only to a larger puzzle size n or to a selected
held-out set of patterns; a more careful design of held-out strategy will be useful to test the limit of
the generalization capability. Finally, the paper trains on a random mix of a balanced dataset; we do
not consider any data curriculum, which may further accelerate the rate of learning or reveal other
learning dynamics of RL.
9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Supported by DARPA (AIQ program, DARPA CMO AWD8860). We thank Dr. Pat Shafto of AIQ
Program for useful discussions. SA also acknowledges support from NSF, ONR, and the Schmidt
Foundation. Additionally, SP is partially supported by the Gordon Wu Fellowship and the Kwanjeong
10
Preprint. Under Review.
Educational Foundation Scholarship. We thank Abhishek Panigrahi, Yun Cheng, Xingyu Zhu, Haoyu
Zhao, Zixuan Wang, Noam Razin, and Sanghyuk Chun for helpful discussions and feedback.
11
Preprint. Under Review.
REFERENCES
4nums.com. Puzzle difficulties. https://www.4nums.com/game/difficulties/, 2025.
Retrieved: August 14, 2025.
Cem Anil, Yuhuai Wu, Anders Andreassen, Aitor Lewkowycz, Vedant Misra, Vinay Ramasesh,
Ambrose Slone, Guy Gur-Ari, Ethan Dyer, and Behnam Neyshabur. Exploring length generalization
in large language models.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:38546–38556,
2022.
Sanjeev Arora and Anirudh Goyal. A theory for emergence of complex skills in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15936, 2023.
Andrew G Barto and Sridhar Mahadevan. Recent advances in hierarchical reinforcement learning.
Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 13:41–77, 2003.
Jiaao Chen, Xiaoman Pan, Dian Yu, Kaiqiang Song, Xiaoyang Wang, Dong Yu, and Jianshu Chen.
Skills-in-context: Unlocking compositionality in large language models. In Yaser Al-Onaizan,
Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, editors,Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 13838–13890, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.812. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2024.findings-emnlp.812/.
Mayee F Chen, Nicholas Roberts, Kush Bhatia, Jue Wang, Ce Zhang, Frederic Sala, and Christopher
Ré. Skill-it! A data-driven skills framework for understanding and training language models. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, 2023.
Xingyu Dang, Christina Baek, Kaiyue Wen, J Zico Kolter, and Aditi Raghunathan. Weight ensembling
improves reasoning in language models. InSecond Conference on Language Modeling, 2025.
URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=S2IKxulLT1.
DeepSeek-AI, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu,
Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu,
Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao
Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan,
Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao,
Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang, Honghui Ding,
Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li, Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang, Jingchang
Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai Dong,
Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Liang Zhao,
Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang,
Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang,
Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, R. J. Chen, R. L.
Jin, Ruyi Chen, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shengfeng Ye, Shiyu Wang,
Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, S. S. Li, Shuang Zhou, Shaoqing Wu, Shengfeng
Ye, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, T. Wang, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wen Liu, Wenfeng
Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang, W. L. Xiao, Wei An, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan
Wang, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xinyu Yang,
Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaosha Chen,
Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Xianzu Wang, Xinxia Shan, Y . K. Li,
Y . Q. Wang, Y . X. Wei, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Wang,
Yi Yu, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan,
Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yuan Ou, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia
He, Yunfan Xiong, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Y . X. Zhu, Yanhong
Xu, Yanping Huang, Yaohui Li, Yi Zheng, Yuchen Zhu, Yunxian Ma, Ying Tang, Yukun Zha,
Yuting Yan, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang,
Zhewen Hao, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhiyu Wu, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li,
Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Zizheng Pan, Zhen Huang, Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, and Zhen
Zhang. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning, 2025.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2501.12948.
12
Preprint. Under Review.
Kanishk Gandhi, Denise Lee, Gabriel Grand, Muxin Liu, Winson Cheng, Archit Sharma, and
Noah D. Goodman. Stream of search (sos): Learning to search in language, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2404.03683.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Nathan Herr, Tim Rocktäschel, and Roberta Raileanu. Llm-first search: Self-guided exploration of
the solution space.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05213, 2025.
Audrey Huang, Adam Block, Dylan J Foster, Dhruv Rohatgi, Cyril Zhang, Max Simchowitz, Jor-
dan T. Ash, and Akshay Krishnamurthy. Self-improvement in language models: The sharpening
mechanism. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=WJaUkwci9o.
Nayoung Lee, Ziyang Cai, Avi Schwarzschild, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Self-
improving transformers overcome easy-to-hard and length generalization challenges. InForty-
second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=ZtX0MBT6mf.
Zichen Liu, Changyu Chen, Wenjun Li, Penghui Qi, Tianyu Pang, Chao Du, Wee Sun Lee, and Min
Lin. Understanding r1-zero-like training: A critical perspective.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20783,
2025.
Jorge A Mendez and Eric Eaton. How to reuse and compose knowledge for a lifetime of tasks: A sur-
vey on continual learning and functional composition.Transactions on Machine Learning Research,
2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=VynY6Bk03b.
Survey Certification.
Tianwei Ni, Allen Nie, Sapana Chaudhary, Yao Liu, Huzefa Rangwala, and Rasool Fakoor. Teaching
large language models to reason through learning and forgetting.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11364,
2025.
OpenAI, :, Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden
Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, Alex Iftimie, Alex Karpenko,
Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Neitz, Alexander Prokofiev, Alexander Wei, Allison Tam, Ally
Bennett, Ananya Kumar, Andre Saraiva, Andrea Vallone, Andrew Duberstein, Andrew Kondrich,
Andrey Mishchenko, Andy Applebaum, Angela Jiang, Ashvin Nair, Barret Zoph, Behrooz Ghor-
bani, Ben Rossen, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Boaz Barak, Bob McGrew, Borys Minaiev, Botao
Hao, Bowen Baker, Brandon Houghton, Brandon McKinzie, Brydon Eastman, Camillo Lugaresi,
Cary Bassin, Cary Hudson, Chak Ming Li, Charles de Bourcy, Chelsea V oss, Chen Shen, Chong
Zhang, Chris Koch, Chris Orsinger, Christopher Hesse, Claudia Fischer, Clive Chan, Dan Roberts,
Daniel Kappler, Daniel Levy, Daniel Selsam, David Dohan, David Farhi, David Mely, David
Robinson, Dimitris Tsipras, Doug Li, Dragos Oprica, Eben Freeman, Eddie Zhang, Edmund Wong,
Elizabeth Proehl, Enoch Cheung, Eric Mitchell, Eric Wallace, Erik Ritter, Evan Mays, Fan Wang,
Felipe Petroski Such, Filippo Raso, Florencia Leoni, Foivos Tsimpourlas, Francis Song, Fred
von Lohmann, Freddie Sulit, Geoff Salmon, Giambattista Parascandolo, Gildas Chabot, Grace
Zhao, Greg Brockman, Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Haiming Bao, Hao Sheng, Hart Andrin,
Hessam Bagherinezhad, Hongyu Ren, Hunter Lightman, Hyung Won Chung, Ian Kivlichan, Ian
O’Connell, Ian Osband, Ignasi Clavera Gilaberte, Ilge Akkaya, Ilya Kostrikov, Ilya Sutskever,
Irina Kofman, Jakub Pachocki, James Lennon, Jason Wei, Jean Harb, Jerry Twore, Jiacheng Feng,
Jiahui Yu, Jiayi Weng, Jie Tang, Jieqi Yu, Joaquin Quiñonero Candela, Joe Palermo, Joel Parish,
Johannes Heidecke, John Hallman, John Rizzo, Jonathan Gordon, Jonathan Uesato, Jonathan
Ward, Joost Huizinga, Julie Wang, Kai Chen, Kai Xiao, Karan Singhal, Karina Nguyen, Karl
Cobbe, Katy Shi, Kayla Wood, Kendra Rimbach, Keren Gu-Lemberg, Kevin Liu, Kevin Lu, Kevin
Stone, Kevin Yu, Lama Ahmad, Lauren Yang, Leo Liu, Leon Maksin, Leyton Ho, Liam Fedus,
Lilian Weng, Linden Li, Lindsay McCallum, Lindsey Held, Lorenz Kuhn, Lukas Kondraciuk,
Lukasz Kaiser, Luke Metz, Madelaine Boyd, Maja Trebacz, Manas Joglekar, Mark Chen, Marko
Tintor, Mason Meyer, Matt Jones, Matt Kaufer, Max Schwarzer, Meghan Shah, Mehmet Yatbaz,
Melody Y . Guan, Mengyuan Xu, Mengyuan Yan, Mia Glaese, Mianna Chen, Michael Lampe,
13
Preprint. Under Review.
Michael Malek, Michele Wang, Michelle Fradin, Mike McClay, Mikhail Pavlov, Miles Wang,
Mingxuan Wang, Mira Murati, Mo Bavarian, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Nat McAleese, Neil Chowd-
hury, Neil Chowdhury, Nick Ryder, Nikolas Tezak, Noam Brown, Ofir Nachum, Oleg Boiko, Oleg
Murk, Olivia Watkins, Patrick Chao, Paul Ashbourne, Pavel Izmailov, Peter Zhokhov, Rachel Dias,
Rahul Arora, Randall Lin, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Raz Gaon, Reah Miyara, Reimar Leike, Renny
Hwang, Rhythm Garg, Robin Brown, Roshan James, Rui Shu, Ryan Cheu, Ryan Greene, Saachi
Jain, Sam Altman, Sam Toizer, Sam Toyer, Samuel Miserendino, Sandhini Agarwal, Santiago
Hernandez, Sasha Baker, Scott McKinney, Scottie Yan, Shengjia Zhao, Shengli Hu, Shibani
Santurkar, Shraman Ray Chaudhuri, Shuyuan Zhang, Siyuan Fu, Spencer Papay, Steph Lin, Suchir
Balaji, Suvansh Sanjeev, Szymon Sidor, Tal Broda, Aidan Clark, Tao Wang, Taylor Gordon, Ted
Sanders, Tejal Patwardhan, Thibault Sottiaux, Thomas Degry, Thomas Dimson, Tianhao Zheng,
Timur Garipov, Tom Stasi, Trapit Bansal, Trevor Creech, Troy Peterson, Tyna Eloundou, Valerie
Qi, Vineet Kosaraju, Vinnie Monaco, Vitchyr Pong, Vlad Fomenko, Weiyi Zheng, Wenda Zhou,
Wes McCabe, Wojciech Zaremba, Yann Dubois, Yinghai Lu, Yining Chen, Young Cha, Yu Bai,
Yuchen He, Yuchen Zhang, Yunyun Wang, Zheng Shao, and Zhuohan Li. Openai o1 system card,
2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2412.16720.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback.Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–
27744, 2022.
Jiayi Pan, Xiuyu Li, Long Lian, Charlie Snell, Yifei Zhou, Adam Yala, Trevor Darrell, Kurt Keutzer,
and Alane Suhr. Learning adaptive parallel reasoning with language models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.15466, 2025a.
Jiayi Pan, Junjie Zhang, Xingyao Wang, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Alane Suhr. Tinyzero.
https://github.com/Jiayi-Pan/TinyZero, 2025b. Accessed: 2025-01-24.
Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi
Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan,
Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report, 2025.
John Schulman. Approximating kl divergence. http://joschu.net/blog/kl-approx.
html, 2020. Retrieved: August 25, 2025.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms, 2017. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1707.06347.
Amrith Setlur, Matthew Y . R. Yang, Charlie Snell, Jeremy Greer, Ian Wu, Virginia Smith, Max
Simchowitz, and Aviral Kumar. e3: Learning to explore enables extrapolation of test-time compute
for llms, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2506.09026.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, Y . K. Li, Y . Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of
mathematical reasoning in open language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2402.03300.
Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng,
Haibin Lin, and Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework.arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2409.19256, 2024.
Vaishnavi Shrivastava, Ahmed Awadallah, Vidhisha Balachandran, Shivam Garg, Harkirat Behl, and
Dimitris Papailiopoulos. Sample more to think less: Group filtered policy optimization for concise
reasoning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09726, 2025.
Zafir Stojanovski, Oliver Stanley, Joe Sharratt, Richard Jones, Abdulhakeem Adefioye, Jean Kaddour,
and Andreas Köpf. Reasoning gym: Reasoning environments for reinforcement learning with
verifiable rewards, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2505.24760.
14
Preprint. Under Review.
Yiyou Sun, Shawn Hu, Georgia Zhou, Ken Zheng, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Nouha Dziri, and Dawn
Song. Omega: Can llms reason outside the box in math? evaluating exploratory, compositional,
and transformative generalization, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2506.18880.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning.Artificial Intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.
Emanuel Todorov. Compositionality of optimal control laws. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 22, 2009.
Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan.
Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models.Advances in neural
information processing systems, 36:11809–11822, 2023.
Dingli Yu, Simran Kaur, Arushi Gupta, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. Skill-
mix: a flexible and expandable family of evaluations for AI models. InThe Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian
Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm reinforcement learning system at
scale.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
Lifan Yuan, Weize Chen, Yuchen Zhang, Ganqu Cui, Hanbin Wang, Ziming You, Ning Ding, Zhiyuan
Liu, Maosong Sun, and Hao Peng. From f(x) and g(x) to f(g(x)) : Llms learn new skills in rl by
composing old ones.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25123, 2025.
Yang Yue, Zhiqi Chen, Rui Lu, Andrew Zhao, Zhaokai Wang, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Does
reinforcement learning really incentivize reasoning capacity in llms beyond the base model?arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.13837, 2025.
Haoyu Zhao, Simran Kaur, Dingli Yu, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. Can models learn
skill composition from examples?Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
102393–102427, 2024.
Yongchao Zhou, Uri Alon, Xinyun Chen, Xuezhi Wang, Rishabh Agarwal, and Denny Zhou. Trans-
formers can achieve length generalization but not robustly.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09371,
2024.
15
Preprint. Under Review.
A EXPERIMENTALSETUP(MOREDETAILS)
A.1 EXPRESSIONS TOPATTERNS
Here are the heuristics (in plain English) to map an expression to its canonical form.
• Remove any unnecessary parentheses. For example, map(A+B) +CtoA+B+C.
• If possible, use + and × instead of − and /. For example, map A−(B−C) to A−B+C .
• For commutative operations (+ and ×), the operands are sorted in decreasing order of the
“weight” of the operand (i.e., the number of symbols involved in the intermediate term). For
example,(A+B)×Cis preferred overA×(B+C).
• If in the same intermediate level of computation, + and × should appear before − and /.
For example, A+B−C is preferred over A−B+C . For example, (A+B)×(A−B)
is preferred over(A−B)×(A+B).
The full list of mapping is given in Tables 13 to 16. In Section F, we show that the choice of the
canonicalization scheme does not affect the main findings of the paper.
A.1.1 A TREEVIEW OFEXPRESSIONS ANDPATTERNS
Eachexpressioncan be viewed as a binary tree, with each node representing an operation and each
leaf node representing a symbol. To define congruence between equivalent expressions, we convert
them to a signedn-ary tree:
• Each node now represents a chain of addition/subtraction operations ( ⊕) or a chain of
multiplication/division operations ( ⊗). Each node can now connect to any number of
operands that are being computed in that chain. For example, A+B+C is represented
with one node with 3 children.
• Each edge is assigned a positive sign if it connects to an operand that is being
added/multiplied in the chain or a negative sign if connects to an operand that is being
subtracted/divided in the chain.
• To convert from a binary tree to an-ary tree:
– For nodes representing addition/multiplication, mark both edges as positive. For nodes
representing subtraction/division, mark the left edge as positive but the right as negative.
– Recursively merge any pair of parent/child if they belong in the same chain. The sign
of the edges of the child node will be flipped if the edge between the parent and the
child was negative.
If the binary trees have the same representation in the signedn-ary tree, they are considered equivalent.
Thepattern(canonical form) can be retrieved as follows:
• At any level, sort the children by
1. sign of the edge between the shared parent and the child (positive comes first);
2. the weight of the subtree rooted at the child (heavy comes first);
3. the number of positive edges to the grandchildren (more positive edges comes first).
• Do an in-order traversal of the tree. Print the first node as A, the second node as B, and so
forth. Include parentheses only if a child subtree has weight>1 and is rooted in a⊕node.
A.1.2 NUMBER OFEXPRESSIONS ANDPATTERNS
Given n, the number of distinctexpressionsis Cn−1 ×4 n−1 where Cn is the Catalan number. There
are Cn−1 ways to assign the order of n−1 operations (equivalently, choose the structure of the
binary tree). For example, when n= 4 , there are 5 ways: ((AB)C)D, (A(BC))D, (AB)(CD) ,
A((BC)D), andA(B(CD)). There are additionally4 n−1 different ways to choose the operations.
The number of distinctpatterns Tn is equal to the number of trees with n leaf nodes with the
following constraints: 1) any child of a⊕node must be a leaf node or a⊗node (and vice versa); 2)
16
Preprint. Under Review.
A
B C
D 
Right-HeavyLeft-Heavy Balanced
B
C
D
A
D
A
 B
 C
Figure 6:Grouping canonical patterns by tree structure ( n= 4 ).Internal (blue) nodes are
operators and leaves (A, B, C, D)are operands. We categorize patterns by the relative size of the
root’s subtrees: left-heavy, balanced, or right-heavy.
no node shall have all negative edges. We letAn, Mn respectively denote the number of such trees
with a ⊕ root node and a ⊗ root node. We let A1 = 1(for the single leaf A) and M1 = 0. For n≥2 ,
Tn, An, Mn can be computed with the following recursive definition.



An =n+ P
p∈ S
2≤k<n
P(n,k)
"
(g1 + 1)
 
mpQ
j=1
 gp,j+2Mdp,j −1
gp,j

!
−
 
mpQ
j=1
 gp,j+Mdp,j −1
gp,j

!#
Mn =n+ P
p∈ S
2≤k<n
P(n,k)
"
(g1 + 1)
 
mpQ
j=1
 gp,j+2Adp,j −1
gp,j

!
−
 
mpQ
j=1
 gp,j+Adp,j −1
gp,j

!#
Tn =A n +M n
where
•P(n, k)is the unordered set of partitions ofninto a sum ofkpositive integers
• Each partitionp∈ S
2≤k<n
P(n, k)is written as
p=
gp,1 times
z }| {
(dp,1 +d p,1 +···+d p,1) +···+
gp,mp times
z }| { 
dp,mp +···+d p,mp

+
g1 times
z }| {
(1 +···+ 1)
where
–m p is the number of distinct part sizes inp(other than 1)
–d p,j >1are the distinct part sizes inp
–g p,j are their corresponding multiplicities, andg 1 is the multiplicity for1
The first n corresponds to assigning {0,1,···, n−1} negative edges to n leaf nodes directly
connected to the root node (which we assume to be ⊕ without loss of generality). Then for any
partition p∈P(n, k) where 2≤k < n, any dp,j >1 corresponds to a ⊗ child node with weight
dp,j, whereas dp,j = 1 corresponds to a leaf node directly connected. If dp,i ̸=d p,j, then the
corresponding ⊗ child nodes are distinguishable, so we can independently count the number of
choices for each child node.
For each dp,j >1 , there could be multiple ⊗ child nodes that have the same weight and can have one
of Mdpj
shapes. If they have the same shape, they are indistinguishable. For eachi= 1,2,···, M dp,j ,
letx i ≥0denote the number of the child nodes that have the corresponding shape such that
x1 +x 2 +···+x Mdp,j
=g p,j
17
Preprint. Under Review.
For each xi, there are xi + 1distinguishable ways to assign a sign to each child node ({0,1,···, x i}
negative edges). Therefore, we apply the stars and bars formula to get:X
x1+···+xMdp,j
=gp,j
xi≥0∀i
(x1 + 1)(x2 + 1)···(x Mdp,j
+ 1)
=
X
y1+···+yMdp,j
=gp,j+Mdp,j
yi≥1∀i
y1y2 ···y Mdp,j
=
(gp,j +M dp,j ) +Mdp,j −1
2Mdp,j −1

=
gp,j + 2Mdp,j −1
gp,j

When d= 1, the leaf children are all indistinguishable and there are g1 + 1ways to assign a sign to
each leaf. We finally need to subtract the case where we assigned a negative edge to all possible gp,j
child nodes of all possible weight of dp,j. For each choice of xi, there is exactly 1 way to assign a
negative sign to all child nodes. Again, by the stars and bars formula, we get
X
x1+···+xMdp,j
=gp,j
xi≥0∀i
1 =
gp,j +M dp,j −1
gp,j

A.2 DATASET
A.2.1 WHY IS THEEXISTINGDATASETLACKING?
Pan et al. (2025b) do not release the exact generation code for their dataset. So instead, we sample
10000 examples from the training split of the dataset and count the number of examples that can be
solved with a given pattern (if one example can be solved with multiple patterns, increment the count
of all such patterns). 18 of the 114 patterns never appear in the dataset (i.e., none of the examples can
be solved with the patterns), and some patterns occur much more often than others (Figure 7). In the
test split (the last 1000 examples), there are 36 out of 114 patterns that never appear.
One reason behind the imbalance is that almost half of the dataset consists of examples for n= 3,
even though there are only 18 patterns for n= 3 compared to 96 for n= 4. Another explanation
is that the requirement that the target number is an integer within [1,99] biases towards addition
and subtraction—multiplication would frequently cause the expression to be larger than the bound;
division would frequently make the final value non-integer.
0 20 40 60 80 100
Patterns (Sorted by Number of Examples)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500Number of Examples
Figure 7:Number of examples per pattern in Pan et al. (2025b).18 out of 114 patterns do not
appear in a randomly selected 10000 examples from the dataset. Few patterns (mostly from n= 3)
appear disproportionally frequently.
Two other codebases that provide the generation code for Countdown (Gandhi et al., 2024; Stojanovski
et al., 2025) wrongly assume that intermediate expressions cannot evaluate to non-integer values.
This incorrectly removes puzzles like 8÷(3−8÷3) = 24 which are very difficult even for humans
(4nums.com, 2025) and should be used to test against models.
18
Preprint. Under Review.
A.2.2 WHATHAPPENSWHENTRAINING ON THEEXISTINGDATASET?
We train Qwen2.5-3B on the dataset by Pan et al. (2025a) with the same set of hyperparameters
and evaluate on both our and their held-out data. Since we do not explicitly check if our held-out
data is in their training data, the results on our held-out data may be slightly higher than expected. In
Figure 8, we recreate Figure 3.
Even though the model performance seems to smoothly improve, the final performance is much
lower than training on our balanced dataset, which stems from the model failing to reliably learn
most n= 4 patterns. This suggests that the diversity of the data and the presence of challenging
patterns helps the model identify reusable components. Additionally, many patterns are not present
when evaluating on the held-out data from Pan et al. (2025a), precisely because none of the puzzles
test those patterns. This points to another deficiency in the existing datasets for COUNTDOWNthat
test simple additive skills, rather than a well-rounded portfolio of arithmetic reasoning.
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=3] [n=4]
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=3] [n=4]
Figure 8:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-3B)trained on dataset from Pan et al. (2025a).
(Left)evaluated on our dataset;(Right)evaluated on the held-out data from Pan et al. (2025a). Even
though model accuracy smoothly increases (top), models do not reliably learn most n= 4 patterns
and fails to generate at least 10% of n= 4 patterns (bottom). The held-out data from Pan et al.
(2025a) do not include 36 possible patterns and fail to test the models on the corresponding skills.
A.2.3 CREATING ABALANCEDDATASET
To create our balanced dataset, we first choose a pattern and then plug in n numbers that are sampled
independently and uniformly at random from [1,99] . If the output of the expression is an integer
in [1,99] , we include it in our dataset.For each pattern, we repeat this process until we have 4000
distinct examples or have sampled 10 million combinations. There are only 15 patterns (4 from
n= 3 and 11 from n= 4) where we sample less than 4000 examples. The exact numbers are given
in Table 4. For each pattern, we select the first 10 examples as heldout examples. In total, we have
418619 examples for training and 1140 examples for testing.
For evaluation on n= 5, we similarly sample 10 examples for each of 558 patterns and for n= 6, 1
example for each of 4328 patterns.
A.3 TRAINING
We train with batch size and mini batch size 256, prompt and response length 1024, learning rate
10−6, and KL coefficient 10−3, where the KL divergence is computed with the k3 estimator (low
19
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 4:Number of training examples per pattern.Any pattern not listed has 4000 examples.
Pattern Number of Examples Pattern Number of Examples
(A+B)×C 3333 A×B×C 315
A/(B+C) 3905 A/B/C 791
(A×B+C)×D 2314 (A+B)×C×D 927
A×B×C×D 188 A/(B×C+D) 2704
A/(B+C)/D 1058 A/B/C/D 264
A/B−C×D 2546 (A+B)×(C+D) 647
A/(B+C)−D 932 A/B/C−D 1033
(A/B−C)/D 2802 - -
variance) (Schulman, 2020). Following Liu et al. (2025), we do not normalize by the standard
deviation in the GRPO advantage computation. We use n= 4 rollouts except during a warmup phase
for 1.5B and 3B models (Section C.1). For the PPO experiments in Section C.5, we use a critic
learning rate of 10−5 and PPO mini bach size of 64. For all other hyperparameters, we use the default
values from the verl package version 0.5.0.dev0 (Sheng et al., 2024). See Section E for the prompt
template used.
20
Preprint. Under Review.
B MAINRESULTS(CONTINUED)
B.1 ADDITIONALTABLES
1.5B/3B models smoothly improve performance throughout training (1635 steps), whereas the 7B
model reaches peak performance before 1 epoch. In the main paper, we reported the performance of
the checkpoints right before the training reward declines (1350/950/650 steps respectively for each
seed). For completeness, we also provide the performance of the final checkpoints of the 7B model in
Tables 5 and 6. The 7B model can eventually improve on right-heavy patterns ([1]−[3] or [1]÷[3] )
but at the cost of sacrificing performance on balanced and left-heavy patterns. Additionally, we report
the standard deviation when averaging across random seeds.
In Table 5, we also report the performance of the base models before GRPO training. Note that the
Pass@32 for these models is very close to 1−(1−p) 32 where p= Average Accuracy, suggesting
that the models are randomly guessing the output. At the same time, within each output, the model
tends to randomly guess multiple expressions, until it runs out of the generation budget. Since there
is only a small subset of expressions that are valid for n= 3,4 (up to 18×3! = 108 for n= 3 and
96×4! = 2304), the random baseline for the base models is quite high (assuming 10 guesses per
output, p≈0.1 for n= 3 and p≈0.05 for n= 4). The observed performance of the base models is
not far from the random baseline.
Table 5:Performance across model size (Full version).Averaged across all successful seeds (final
(F) checkpoints for 1.5B/3B andbest(B) andfinal(F) checkpoints for 7B). All-correct@32 (All),
Average Accuracy (Avg), and Pass@32 (Pass) onn=3,4 (trained) and n=5,6 (held out). Models
learn n= 3,4 patterns almost perfectly and generalize to larger puzzle sizes n= 5,6 , but the gap
between Pass@32 and Average Accuracy increases withn, signaling that the generalization is not
perfect.
Model All Avg Pass All Avg Pass
n=3n=4
1.5B 0.00 0.02 0.42 0.00 0.00 0.00
1.5B (F) 0.97±0.01 1.00±0.00 1.00±0.00 0.60±0.09 0.82±0.02 0.93±0.00
3B 0.00 0.05 0.66 0.00 0.01 0.20
3B (F) 0.93±0.01 0.99±0.01 1.00±0.00 0.56±0.06 0.81±0.03 0.94±0.01
7B 0.00 0.10 0.88 0.00 0.02 0.36
7B (B) 0.99±0.01 1.00±0.00 1.00±0.00 0.61±0.07 0.86±0.03 0.98±0.01
7B (F) 0.95±0.02 0.99±0.00 1.00±0.00 0.56±0.03 0.80±0.06 0.92±0.06
n=5n=6
1.5B 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.01
1.5B (F) 0.13±0.05 0.36±0.03 0.68±0.00 0.00±0.00 0.09±0.00 0.36±0.00
3B 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00
3B (F) 0.12±0.02 0.39±0.01 0.68±0.02 0.02±0.00 0.15±0.00 0.40±0.00
7B 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.02
7B (B) 0.15±0.02 0.46±0.04 0.75±0.03 0.02±0.00 0.15±0.00 0.39±0.00
7B (F) 0.10±0.02 0.35±0.05 0.61±0.10 0.01±0.00 0.12±0.00 0.36±0.00
21
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 6:Per-pattern precision averaged by pattern structure on n=4 (Full version).Averaged
across all successful seeds (finalcheckpoints for 1.5B/3B andbestandfinalcheckpoints for 7B).
Averaged by (a) root operator; (b) pattern with root operator −; (c) pattern with root operator ÷.
Models struggle more on −,÷ as the root operator. Shapes in the form of [1]−[3] or [1]÷[3]
are particularly challenging. Within each column, the highest number isboldfacedand the second
highest number is underlined.
(a) by root operator
Operator 1.5B 3B 7B(best)7B(final)
+0.86 ±0.08 0.85 ±0.010.91±0.01 0.83 ±0.03
−0.83±0.09 0.80±0.04 0.86±0.06 0.76±0.11
×0.90±0.010.86±0.030.91±0.010.84±0.08
÷0.75±0.04 0.78±0.06 0.83±0.04 0.81±0.08
(b) by subtree shape (−)
Shape 1.5B 3B 7B(best)7B(final)
3 −1 0.81 ±0.13 0.78 ±0.03 0.84±0.04 0.72±0.12
2 −2 0.92±0.010.89±0.000.90±0.070.86±0.10
1 −3 0.73±0.00 0.76±0.09 0.86 ±0.12 0.82 ±0.10
(c) by subtree shape (÷)
Shape 1.5B 3B 7B(best)7B(final)
3 ÷1 0.77 ±0.05 0.77 ±0.05 0.83 ±0.05 0.83±0.05
2 ÷2 0.88±0.100.85±0.000.91±0.070.89±0.14
1 ÷3 0.61±0.03 0.76±0.12 0.80±0.17 0.80±0.05
22
Preprint. Under Review.
B.2 EFFECT OFSUPERVISEDFINE-TUNING(SFT) (CONTINUED)
Here, we continue the discussion in Section 4.5.
B.2.1 TRAINING
We train with batch size 256, prompt and response length 1024, max learning rate 10−6 with a linear
warmup of 0.03 and cosine decay to zero. For all other hyperparmeters, we use the default values
from the verl package. We train the Qwen2.5-1.5B model with and without the random chain
of thought text, each with 1 random seed for dataset shuffling.
B.2.2 LEARNING DYNAMICS
In Figures 9 to 11, we present the learning dynamics plots for the Qwen2.5-1.5B model trained
with SFT (equivalent to Figure 4).
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 9:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B with SFT). Here, the high-precision
threshold has been lowered to 50%. Even though the coverage of n= 5 patterns (OOD) decrease
in the following order: balanced > left-heavy > right-heavy, the model masters n= 4 patterns
(in-distribution) in the opposite order: right-heavy > left-heavy > balanced. This shows a fundamental
difference in the learning dynamics from RL.
23
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 10:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B with SFT). The model does not reliably
learn anyn= 4pattern.
24
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 11:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B with SFT+CoT). The model does not
reliably learn anyn= 4pattern.
25
Preprint. Under Review.
C ADDITIONALABLATIONS
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Step
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7Reward
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Step
100
200
300
400
500
600Response Length
Run 1 Run 2
Figure 12:Qwen2.5-1.5B often learns a formatting-only shortcut: (Left)training reward;(Right)
training response length of two distinct training runs. Once the model learns to collect the formatting
reward (grey dotted vertical), the model attempts the puzzle without chain of thought, characterized
by a sharp decrease in the response length. During some but not all runs (blue), we observe a phase
transition (grey solid vertical), where the model starts generating chain of thought again.
C.1 A FORMATTING-ONLYSHORTCUT,ANDHOW TOAVOIDIT
Each answer can receive 0.1 points for correct formatting, plus up to 0.9 points for correctness.
Smaller models (1.5B and 3B) often exploit the format-only reward first (Figure 12), whereas the
larger 7B model does not. This shows that pretraining endows the larger model with more advanced
reasoning circuits. For example, if it can collect reward 0.9 with probability >0.1 from the start,
then it has no incentive to overfitting to the formatting reward.
Intervention (large-to-small group size schedule)To stabilize training, we warm-start training
with a larger group size to encourage exploration of different patterns 8 and reduce the group size to
the default value ofG= 4whenever the models make the phase transition and exit the shortcut.
C.2 EFFECT OFSTANDARDDEVIATIONNORMALIZATION
For our main experiments, we do not apply std normalization to the group advantage, following Liu
et al. (2025). Here, we present the results when we do normalize the advantages by the standard
deviation in each group (Shao et al., 2024). All results are from the 1.5B model.
C.2.1 NEGATIVEGRADIENTSINDUCELONGERRESPONSES
When initializing training with the normalization, the response length increases faster and stays
higher, compared to when training without normalization (Figure 13). We observe a similar trend
with a different model (Section D).
To identify the cause of the phenomenon, we separately train with positive gradients only (set the
group advantage Ai = max(Ai,0) after the standard deviation normalization) and negative gradients
only (Ai = min(Ai,0) ). The response length of the positive-only training run follows the trend of
training without the normalization, whereas negative-only training mimics the trend of training with
the normalization. This shows that the negative gradients are the sole cause behind the initial increase
in the response length.
This behavior can be understood as the effect of the negative gradients on the token probabilities. Ini-
tially, weak models do not collect the final output reward, and the possible rewards are within{0,0.1}.
However, when the rewards are normalized by the standard deviation, the absolute value of the
advantage becomes at most 20 times larger. Updates using the negative gradients greatly reduces the
8We find that G= 16 for the 1.5B and G= 8 for the 3B model are sufficient to induce the phase transition.
26
Preprint. Under Review.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Step
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25Reward
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Step
200
400
600
800
1000Response Length
No Normalization Normalization Normalization (Positive Only) Normalization (Negative Only)
Figure 13:When normalizing group rewards by standard deviation, negative gradients make
responses longer: (Left)training reward;(Right)training response length. In the first 25 steps,
training reward increases to 0.1 at the same pace across all runs. However, with standard deviation
normalization (red), the response length peaks high, and the training reward stalls. Training with
only positive gradients (green dotted) and negative gradients (yellow dotted) respectively mimic the
behavior of training without (blue) and with (red) normalization.
probability of all tokens generated, and in particular, the generation of the EOS character (which usu-
ally occurs after the <answer></answer> tags). After the probability of generating EOS token is
lowered sufficiently, the model tends to continue generating tokens after the<answer></answer>
tags.
C.2.2 STANDARDDEVIATIONNORMALIZATIONLEADS TOWORSEPERFORMANCE
We additionally notice that normalizing by the standard deviation leads to a worse performance at the
end of the training (Table 7).
Table 7:Effect of standard deviation normalization on final performance.All-correct@32 (All@),
Average Accuracy (Avg), and Pass@32 (Pass@) with or without standard deviation normalization
during group rewards computation. Normalizing generally hurts final performance.
No Normalization Normalization
All@ Avg Pass@ All@ Avg Pass@
1.5B 0.66 0.85 0.94 0.36 0.60 0.86
3B 0.61 0.84 0.95 0.66 0.86 0.96
C.3 EFFECT OFNUMBER OFROLLOUTS
In Section C.1, we increase the number of rollouts only during the initial phase of training to induce
the phase transition necessary for learning. Here, we explore maintaining the increased number of
rollouts (G= 16for the 1.5B model andG= 8for the 3B model) until the end of the training.
We notice that entropy remains slightly higher than training with a small group size (G= 4) and the
training reward may start decreasing before 1 epoch (around 0.5 epoch for 1.5B model and 0.75 epoch
for 3B model). We stop training whenever we observe a decline in the training reward, and evaluate
the final performance. The performance of these models is slightly worse than training switching to a
smaller rollout mid-training and significantly worse than fully training with G= 4 (Table 8). Other
than the initial training stability, we observe no benefit of training with a larger group size.
27
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 8:Effect of group size on final performance.All-correct@32 (All@), Average Accuracy
(Avg), and Pass@32 (Pass@) on different choices of group sizes. A larger number of rollouts
generally hurts final performance.
Small Large Switch
All@ Avg Pass@ All@ Avg Pass@ All@ Avg Pass@
1.5B 0.66 0.85 0.94 0.46 0.78 0.93 0.46 0.79 0.95
3B 0.61 0.84 0.95 0.46 0.78 0.94 0.48 0.83 0.98
C.4 EFFECT OFHELD-OUTPATTERNS
C.4.1 GENERALIZATION TOHELD-OUTPATTERNS(MOREDETAILS)
Here, we continue the discussion from Section 4.4. When we remove the pattern A/B+C , we must
also remove all patterns which directly includeA/B+C as a subpattern, or patterns that can collapse
intoA/B+C, once some subtasks have been solved. See Table 9 for the full list.
Table 9:The list of patterns removed, when holding out A/B+C .We additionally remove 6
patterns that contain A/B+C as a subpattern and 8 more that can be collapsed into A/B+C once
a subtask has been solved.
Pattern Explanation Canonical Pattern Structure
A/B+C Itself A/B+C [2] + [1]
(A/B+C) +D Direct subpattern A/B+C+D [3] + [1]
(A/B+C)−D Direct subpattern A/B+C−D [3]−[1]
(A/B+C)×D Direct subpattern (A/B+C)×D [3]×[1]
(A/B+C)/D Direct subpattern (A/B+C)/D [3]÷[1]
A−(B/C+D) Direct subpattern A−B/C−D [1]−[3]
A/(B/C+D) Direct subpattern A/(B/C+D) [1]÷[3]
A/B+ (C×D) CombineC×D A×B+C/D [2] + [2]
A/B+ (C/D) CombineC/D A/B+C/D [2] + [2]
A/(B+C) +D CombineB+C A/(B+C) +D [3] + [1]
A/(B−C) +D CombineB−C A/(B−C) +D [3] + [1]
(A+B)/C+D CombineA+B (A+B)/C+D [3] + [1]
(A−B)/C+D CombineA−B (A−B)/C+D [3] + [1]
(A×B)/C+D CombineA×B A×B/C+D [3] + [1]
(A/B)/C+D CombineA/B A/B/C+D [3] + [1]
C.4.2 WHATPATTERNS ARENECESSARY FOR THEMODEL TOLEARN?
We further explore the effect of heldout patterns during training. We train the Qwen2.5-1.5B
model with the following heldout strategies:
• Only 3 / Only 4: Train only with patterns from specific puzzle sizes.
• No Hard: Train without patterns of shape[1]−[3]or[1]÷[3](Section 4.2)
• Randomp: Train only with randomly selectedp% of the patterns
Following Section C.1, we warm-start the training with a larger group size G= 16 and check how
many runs are successful out of 3; i.e., model escapes the formatting-only shortcut after something
“clicks” (Table 10). When hard patterns are not a part of the training (“Only 3” or “No hard”),
the model does not have access to learn from high-entropy, high-reward rollouts and fail to learn.
However, training only with n= 4 patterns still leads to successful training. Additionally, the
diversity of the patterns also seems to be helpful for the model — the probability of a successful run
increases with the number of unique patterns in the dataset.
28
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 10:Number of successful runs (out of 3) per heldout strategy:The existence of harder
patterns and an overall wide range of patterns seems necessary for the 1.5B model to learn.
Only 3 Only 4 No Hard Random 30 Random 40 Random 50
# Successful Runs 0 3 0 1 2 3
C.4.3 MODELSCANGENERALIZE TOUNSEENPATTERNS(RANDOM50)
Even when the model is trained with only a randomly selected 50% of the patterns, more than 95% of
the patterns are present in the final checkpoint, and the model scores near 70% average accuracy.
The 3B model is able to generalize to more patterns, whereas 4% of patterns are Absent from the
reasoning of the 1.5B model and another 4% are always applied incorrectly (Table 11). Additionally,
the 1.5B model is able to generalize to n= 5 patterns, but the strength of the generalization is weaker
than having been trained on the full set of patterns (Table 1).
Table 11:Final performance of models trained without random 50% of patterns:All-correct@32
(All@), Average Accuracy (Avg), and Pass@32 (Pass@) of models. Models can generalize to most
unseen patterns. 3B model is able to generalize to more diverse patterns than 1.5B, but has a lower
All-correct@32.
n=4n=5
All@ Avg Pass@ Absent (%) Incorrect (%) All@ Avg Pass@
1.5B 0.47 0.68 0.82 4 4 0.06 0.25 0.52
3B 0.35 0.69 0.88 1 2 - - -
C.5 CHOICE OFRL ALGORITHM
Here, we investigate the effect of the RL algorithm. We replace the GRPO training with PPO
(Schulman et al., 2017). Due to higher computational constraints, we only train with 1 seed.
1.5B does not escape the formatting-only shortcut as in Section C.1. 3B and 7B improve training
accuracy faster with respect to the same number of gradient updates. However, training entropy
decreases much faster during PPO training, which translates to a lower Pass@32 but a higher All-
correct@32 (Table 12). Compared to GRPO, PPO tends to push the model behavior on each pattern
to one extreme — there are simultaneously more 1) Absent patterns and 2) patterns with precision
of 100%.
Table 12:Effect of RL algorithm on final performance.All-correct@32 (All@), Average Accuracy
(Avg), and Pass@32 (Pass@) of models. Using PPO instead of GRPO improves All-correct@32 at
the cost of Pass@32.
GRPO PPO
All@ Avg Pass@ All@ Avg Pass@
3B 0.61 0.84 0.95 0.65 0.81 0.90
7B 0.62 0.83 0.94 0.76 0.85 0.93
29
Preprint. Under Review.
D RESULTS ON ADIFFERENTMODELFAMILY
We additionally conduct some ablations studies on the Llama-3.2 models (1B and 3B) and a
Llama-3.1 model (8B). We take the chat template from the Instruct variant but discard most
of the system prompt, since the original version is too verbose and is out-of-distribution for the base
model. See Section E for the exact chat template. We apply the same set of training hyperparmaters.
D.1 FORMATTING-ONLYSHORTCUT
Across all model sizes (even the 8B model), Llama-3.2 and Llama-3.1 models also find a
similar formatting-only shortcut as outlined in Section C.1. Llama-3.1-8B is able to escape the
shortcut without a manual intervention (G= 4 rollouts throughout training), but the Llama-3.2
models are unable to escape the shortcut. By applying the group size switching strategy (G= 16 for
Llama-3.2-1B and G= 8 for Llama-3.2-3B), the models are able to escape the shortcut on 2
out of 3 runs each. This shows that the mitigation strategy for the shortcut is applicable to another
model family, but the strength of its effect may depend on the performance of the base model.
D.2LL A M AMODELSDONOTPROPERLYLEARN
Even after escaping the formatting-only shortcut, the Llama models do not properly learn to use
chain-of-thought to improve its answers. Instead, the models generally guess one expression and pad
it with repeated answers or gibberish text.
D.3 AFTERSFTONBASICFORMATTING, RL SHOWS THESAMETREND
We speculate that the Llama base models may require a little more training on the correct formatting
(including the <think> and <answer> tags). We SFT the Llama-3.2-3B model on examples
from out dataset to teach the formatting.9 RL training on top of this warmed-up checkpoint shows a
similar learning dynamics as in the main part of the paper (Figure 15).
D.4 EFFECT OFSTANDARDDEVIATIONNORMALIZATION
We train with standard deviation normalization and reproduce its effect on the response length as
outlined in Section C.2 and report the result in Figure 14.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Step
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10Reward
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Step
500
600
700
800
900
1000Response Length
No Normalization Normalization
Figure 14:Effect of standard deviation normalization on response length:We reproduce the
results from Figure 13.
9We apply the random CoT template and the hyperparameters in Section 4.5. We manually stop training after
50 gradient updates (before the learning rate reaches max value) when the training loss decreases below 1.
30
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 15:Learning dynamics at a glance (Llama-3.2-3B after lightweight SFT). The same
conclusion from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced <
left-heavy<right-heavy.
31
Preprint. Under Review.
E PROMPTSUSEDFORTRAINING
Prompt Template for RL
A conversation between User and Assistant. The user asks a question, and the Assistant
solves it. The assistant first thinks about the reasoning process in the mind and then provides
the user with the answer.
User: Using the numbers {numbers}, create an equation that equals {target}. You can use
basic arithmetic operations (+, -, *, /) and each number can only be used once. Show your
work in <think> </think> tags. And return the final answer in <answer> </answer> tags, for
example <answer> (1 + 2) / 3 </answer>.
Assistant: Let me solve this step by step.
<think>
Prompt Template for SFT
A conversation between User and Assistant. The user asks a question, and the Assistant
solves it. The assistant first thinks about the reasoning process in the mind and then provides
the user with the answer.
User: Using the numbers {numbers}, create an equation that equals {target}. You can use
basic arithmetic operations (+, -, *, /) and each number can only be used once. Show your
work in <think> </think> tags. And return the final answer in <answer> </answer> tags, for
example <answer> (1 + 2) / 3 </answer>.
Assistant: Let me solve this step by step.
<think>Using the numbers {numbers}, create an equation that equals {target}.{CoT
text}</think>
<answer>{Solution text}</answer>
Example CoT Text for SFT
8 / 8 + 3 / 3 = 1 (Incorrect). 3 + 8 + 8 - 3 = 16 (Incorrect). 3 * 3 / 8 - 8 = -6.87 (Incorrect). 8 /
(3 - 8 / 3) = 24 (Correct).
Example Solution Text for SFT
8 / (3 - 8 / 3)
Chat Template forLlamaModels
<|begin_of_text|><|start_header_id|>user<|end_header_id|>
{User prompt}<|eot_id|><|start_header_id|>assistant<|end_header_id|>
32
Preprint. Under Review.
F ALTERNATEWAYS TOCANONICALIZEPATTERNS
A central claim of this work is that the compositional structure of a problem solution (specifically
balanced vs. unbalanced) dictates its difficulty for the model. This analysis, however, relies on our
specific method for mapping syntactically diverse expressions to unique canonical operators. A valid
concern is whether our findings are an artifact of this mapping. For instance, our normalization rules
(Section A.1) resolve ambiguities by systematically preferring left-heavy structures (e.g., mapping
both 9×(3 + 2)and (3 + 2)×9to the canonical form (A+B)×C ). This choice could interact
with an intrinsic bias of the model towards left-to-right sequential generation, thereby confounding
the analysis of structural difficulty. To isolate the effect of structure from our analytical choices, we
conduct two ablations to test the robustness of our conclusions.
Reversed Canonicalization PreferenceFirst, we investigate whether our findings hold under an
alternative normalization scheme. We invert the rule that resolves ambiguity based on subtree weight,
now enforcing a preference forright-heavystructures. For example, under this new canonicalization
scheme, both 9×(3 + 2) and (3 + 2)×9 to the canonical form A×(B+C) . We then redo
the analysis. The results, shown in Figure 16, indicate that our central observations are unaffected
by this change. We observe the same hierarchy of difficulty as reported in Section 4.2: balanced
patterns are mastered most reliably, while the structures that were originally classified as right-heavy
(and additionally structures now included in the right-heavy grouping) remain the most challenging.
This suggests that the difficulty arises from the procedural requirement to commit to an operator
before a complex subroutine is generated, rather than an arbitrary choice of a left- or right-associative
canonical representation.
Analysis Without CanonicalizationSecond, we remove the canonicalization process entirely and
analyze the raw expressions generated by the model. In this setting, a single problem may have
multiple correct solutions corresponding to different tree shapes (e,g, 9×(3 + 2) would map to
A×(B+C) and (3 + 2)×9would map to (A+B)×C . We group all valid expressions generated
across the evaluation set by their unnormalized tree shapes (left-heavy, balanced, or right-heavy), and
measure the per-shape pattern coverage and high-precision pattern coverage. As shown in Figure 17,
the structural difficulty persists. However, a model’s intrinsic bias toward generating solutions in a
particular syntactic form can artificially deflate the measured performance of any structural group
that includes alternative, algebraically equivalent forms. For example, if a model only ever generates
structures like (A+B) +C , but not A+ (B+C) , then the coverage for [1]◦[2] goes down even
though the model can correctly compose two additions.
33
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 16:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B)withreversedcanonicalization. The
same conclusion from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced
<left-heavy<right-heavy.
34
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 17:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B)withoutcanonicalization. While
coverage decreases throughout training (models converge on one of multiple equivalent expressions),
the same conclusion from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure:
balanced<left-heavy<right-heavy.
35
Preprint. Under Review.
G ADDITIONALPLOTS
In Figures 18 to 23, we present the learning dynamics plots for the Qwen2.5-3B/7B models and a
different training run for theQwen2.5-1.5Bmodel (equivalent to Figure 4).
In Figure 26, we present the learning dynamics plots for the Qwen2.5-1.5B model trained on
n∈ {2,3,4}(equivalent to Figures 3 and 4). For each of 4 patterns for n= 2, we generated 1000
examples for training and 10 examples for testing in the same way as in Section A.2.3.
In Figure 27, we present the learning dynamics plots for the Qwen2.5-1.5B model (equivalent to
Figure 4) when the high-precision threshold is changed to 70% or 90%.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 18:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B, another seed). The same conclusion
from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced < left-heavy <
right-heavy.
36
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 19:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-3B). The same conclusion from Figure 4
holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced<left-heavy<right-heavy.
37
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 20:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-3B, another seed). The same conclusion
from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced < left-heavy <
right-heavy.
38
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 21:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-7B). The same conclusion from Figure 4
holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced < left-heavy < right-heavy. We
take thebestcheckpoint at 1350 steps (grey dotted), after which training reward starts declining.
39
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 22:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-7B, another seed). The same conclusion
from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced < left-heavy <
right-heavy. We take thebestcheckpoint at 950 steps (grey dotted), after which training reward starts
declining.
40
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 23:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-7B, another seed). The same conclusion
from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced < left-heavy <
right-heavy. We take thebestcheckpoint at 650 steps (grey dotted), after which training reward starts
declining.
41
Preprint. Under Review.
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
heldout
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=3] [n=4] [n=5]
Figure 24:Generalizes to entire families of held-out compositional patterns (Qwen2.5-1.5B,
another seed).The same conclusion from Figure 5: the model can reuse learned substructures to
assemble novel operator-tree shapes it has never been explicitly trained on.
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
heldout
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
0 250 500 750 1000 1250
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=3] [n=4] [n=5]
Figure 25:Generalizes to entire families of held-out compositional patterns (Qwen2.5-1.5B,
another seed).The same conclusion from Figure 5: the model can reuse learned substructures to
assemble novel operator-tree shapes it has never been explicitly trained on.
42
Preprint. Under Review.
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Pass@32
Avg acc
All-correct@32
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Score
Accuracies
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
present (CoT)
present (final answer)
present + reliable
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction of Patterns
Pattern Coverage
[n=2] [n=3] [n=4] [n=5]
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 26:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B)trained on n∈ {2,3,4}. The same
conclusions from Figures 3 and 4 hold: models exhibit length generalization and master patterns
progressively following a hierarchy of difficulty by subtree structure: balanced < left-heavy <
right-heavy.
43
Preprint. Under Review.
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
pattern coverage
[ 2  1]
[ 1  2]
[n=3][n=3]
pattern coverage
[ 3  1]
[ 2  2]
[ 1  3]
[n=4][n=4][n=4]
pattern coverage
[ 4  1]
[ 3  2]
[ 2  3]
[ 1  4]
[n=5][n=5][n=5][n=5]
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00Fraction
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
0 500 1000 1500
Training Step (index)
high-precision pattern coverage
present (final)
present (CoT)
left-heavy
balanced
right-heavy
Figure 27:Learning dynamics at a glance (Qwen2.5-1.5B)but high-precision defined as precision
≥70% (top); ≥90% (bottom). The same conclusion from Figure 4 holds about the hierarchy of
difficulty by subtree structure: balanced<left-heavy<right-heavy.
44
Preprint. Under Review.
H LIST OFPATTERNS
Table 13: Expressions and their Canonical Forms (Patterns) (Page 1 of 4)
Expression Pattern Expression Pattern
(A+B) +C A+B+C A+ (B+C) A+B+C
(A+B)−C A+B−C A+ (B−C) A+B−C
(A+B)×C (A+B)×C A+ (B×C) A×B+C
(A+B)/C (A+B)/C A+ (B/C) A/B+C
(A−B) +C A+B−C A−(B+C) A−B−C
(A−B)−C A−B−C A−(B−C) A+B−C
(A−B)×C (A−B)×C A−(B×C) A−B×C
(A−B)/C (A−B)/C A−(B/C) A−B/C
(A×B) +C A×B+C A×(B+C) (A+B)×C
(A×B)−C A×B−C A×(B−C) (A−B)×C
(A×B)×C A×B×C A×(B×C) A×B×C
(A×B)/C A×B/C A×(B/C) A×B/C
(A/B) +C A/B+C A/(B+C) A/(B+C)
(A/B)−C A/B−C A/(B−C) A/(B−C)
(A/B)×C A×B/C A/(B×C) A/B/C
(A/B)/C A/B/C A/(B/C) A×B/C
A+ (B+ (C+D)) A+B+C+D A+ (B+ (C−D)) A+B+C−D
A+ (B+ (C×D)) A×B+C+D A+ (B+ (C/D)) A/B+C+D
A+ (B−(C+D)) A+B−C−D A+ (B−(C−D)) A+B+C−D
A+ (B−(C×D)) A+B−C×D A+ (B−(C/D)) A+B−C/D
A+ (B×(C+D)) (A+B)×C+D A+ (B×(C−D)) (A−B)×C+D
A+ (B×(C×D)) A×B×C+D A+ (B×(C/D)) A×B/C+D
A+ (B/(C+D)) A/(B+C) +D A+ (B/(C−D)) A/(B−C) +D
A+ (B/(C×D)) A/B/C+D A+ (B/(C/D)) A×B/C+D
A−(B+ (C+D)) A−B−C−D A−(B+ (C−D)) A+B−C−D
A−(B+ (C×D)) A−B×C−D A−(B+ (C/D)) A−B/C−D
A−(B−(C+D)) A+B+C−D A−(B−(C−D)) A+B−C−D
A−(B−(C×D)) A×B+C−D A−(B−(C/D)) A/B+C−D
A−(B×(C+D)) A−(B+C)×D A−(B×(C−D)) A−(B−C)×D
A−(B×(C×D)) A−B×C×D A−(B×(C/D)) A−B×C/D
A−(B/(C+D)) A−B/(C+D) A−(B/(C−D)) A−B/(C−D)
A−(B/(C×D)) A−B/C/D A−(B/(C/D)) A−B×C/D
A×(B+ (C+D)) (A+B+C)×D A×(B+ (C−D)) (A+B−C)×D
A×(B+ (C×D)) (A×B+C)×D A×(B+ (C/D)) (A/B+C)×D
A×(B−(C+D)) (A−B−C)×D A×(B−(C−D)) (A+B−C)×D
A×(B−(C×D)) (A−B×C)×D A×(B−(C/D)) (A−B/C)×D
A×(B×(C+D)) (A+B)×C×D A×(B×(C−D)) (A−B)×C×D
A×(B×(C×D)) A×B×C×D A×(B×(C/D)) A×B×C/D
A×(B/(C+D)) A×B/(C+D) A×(B/(C−D)) A×B/(C−D)
A×(B/(C×D)) A×B/C/D A×(B/(C/D)) A×B×C/D
A/(B+ (C+D)) A/(B+C+D) A/(B+ (C−D)) A/(B+C−D)
A/(B+ (C×D)) A/(B×C+D) A/(B+ (C/D)) A/(B/C+D)
A/(B−(C+D)) A/(B−C−D) A/(B−(C−D)) A/(B+C−D)
A/(B−(C×D)) A/(B−C×D) A/(B−(C/D)) A/(B−C/D)
A/(B×(C+D)) A/(B+C)/D A/(B×(C−D)) A/(B−C)/D
A/(B×(C×D)) A/B/C/D A/(B×(C/D)) A×B/C/D
A/(B/(C+D)) (A+B)×C/D A/(B/(C−D)) (A−B)×C/D
A/(B/(C×D)) A×B×C/D A/(B/(C/D)) A×B/C/D
A+ ((B+C) +D) A+B+C+D A+ ((B−C) +D) A+B+C−D
A+ ((B×C) +D) A×B+C+D A+ ((B/C) +D) A/B+C+D
45
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 14: Expressions and their Canonical Forms (Patterns) (Page 2 of 4)
Expression Pattern Expression Pattern
A+ ((B+C)−D) A+B+C−D A+ ((B−C)−D) A+B−C−D
A+ ((B×C)−D) A×B+C−D A+ ((B/C)−D) A/B+C−D
A+ ((B+C)×D) (A+B)×C+D A+ ((B−C)×D) (A−B)×C+D
A+ ((B×C)×D) A×B×C+D A+ ((B/C)×D) A×B/C+D
A+ ((B+C)/D) (A+B)/C+D A+ ((B−C)/D) (A−B)/C+D
A+ ((B×C)/D) A×B/C+D A+ ((B/C)/D) A/B/C+D
A−((B+C) +D) A−B−C−D A−((B−C) +D) A+B−C−D
A−((B×C) +D) A−B×C−D A−((B/C) +D) A−B/C−D
A−((B+C)−D) A+B−C−D A−((B−C)−D) A+B+C−D
A−((B×C)−D) A+B−C×D A−((B/C)−D) A+B−C/D
A−((B+C)×D) A−(B+C)×D A−((B−C)×D) A−(B−C)×D
A−((B×C)×D) A−B×C×D A−((B/C)×D) A−B×C/D
A−((B+C)/D) A−(B+C)/D A−((B−C)/D) A−(B−C)/D
A−((B×C)/D) A−B×C/D A−((B/C)/D) A−B/C/D
A×((B+C) +D) (A+B+C)×D A×((B−C) +D) (A+B−C)×D
A×((B×C) +D) (A×B+C)×D A×((B/C) +D) (A/B+C)×D
A×((B+C)−D) (A+B−C)×D A×((B−C)−D) (A−B−C)×D
A×((B×C)−D) (A×B−C)×D A×((B/C)−D) (A/B−C)×D
A×((B+C)×D) (A+B)×C×D A×((B−C)×D) (A−B)×C×D
A×((B×C)×D) A×B×C×D A×((B/C)×D) A×B×C/D
A×((B+C)/D) (A+B)×C/D A×((B−C)/D) (A−B)×C/D
A×((B×C)/D) A×B×C/D A×((B/C)/D) A×B/C/D
A/((B+C) +D) A/(B+C+D) A/((B−C) +D) A/(B+C−D)
A/((B×C) +D) A/(B×C+D) A/((B/C) +D) A/(B/C+D)
A/((B+C)−D) A/(B+C−D) A/((B−C)−D) A/(B−C−D)
A/((B×C)−D) A/(B×C−D) A/((B/C)−D) A/(B/C−D)
A/((B+C)×D) A/(B+C)/D A/((B−C)×D) A/(B−C)/D
A/((B×C)×D) A/B/C/D A/((B/C)×D) A×B/C/D
A/((B+C)/D) A×B/(C+D) A/((B−C)/D) A×B/(C−D)
A/((B×C)/D) A×B/C/D A/((B/C)/D) A×B×C/D
(A+B) + (C+D) A+B+C+D (A+B) + (C−D) A+B+C−D
(A+B) + (C×D) A×B+C+D (A+B) + (C/D) A/B+C+D
(A−B) + (C+D) A+B+C−D (A−B) + (C−D) A+B−C−D
(A−B) + (C×D) A×B+C−D (A−B) + (C/D) A/B+C−D
(A×B) + (C+D) A×B+C+D (A×B) + (C−D) A×B+C−D
(A×B) + (C×D) A×B+C×D (A×B) + (C/D) A×B+C/D
(A/B) + (C+D) A/B+C+D (A/B) + (C−D) A/B+C−D
(A/B) + (C×D) A×B+C/D (A/B) + (C/D) A/B+C/D
(A+B)−(C+D) A+B−C−D (A+B)−(C−D) A+B+C−D
(A+B)−(C×D) A+B−C×D (A+B)−(C/D) A+B−C/D
(A−B)−(C+D) A−B−C−D (A−B)−(C−D) A+B−C−D
(A−B)−(C×D) A−B×C−D (A−B)−(C/D) A−B/C−D
(A×B)−(C+D) A×B−C−D (A×B)−(C−D) A×B+C−D
(A×B)−(C×D) A×B−C×D (A×B)−(C/D) A×B−C/D
(A/B)−(C+D) A/B−C−D (A/B)−(C−D) A/B+C−D
(A/B)−(C×D) A/B−C×D (A/B)−(C/D) A/B−C/D
(A+B)×(C+D) (A+B)×(C+D) (A+B)×(C−D) (A+B)×(C−D)
(A+B)×(C×D) (A+B)×C×D (A+B)×(C/D) (A+B)×C/D
(A−B)×(C+D) (A+B)×(C−D) (A−B)×(C−D) (A−B)×(C−D)
(A−B)×(C×D) (A−B)×C×D (A−B)×(C/D) (A−B)×C/D
46
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 15: Expressions and their Canonical Forms (Patterns) (Page 3 of 4)
Expression Pattern Expression Pattern
(A×B)×(C+D) (A+B)×C×D (A×B)×(C−D) (A−B)×C×D
(A×B)×(C×D) A×B×C×D (A×B)×(C/D) A×B×C/D
(A/B)×(C+D) (A+B)×C/D (A/B)×(C−D) (A−B)×C/D
(A/B)×(C×D) A×B×C/D (A/B)×(C/D) A×B/C/D
(A+B)/(C+D) (A+B)/(C+D) (A+B)/(C−D) (A+B)/(C−D)
(A+B)/(C×D) (A+B)/C/D (A+B)/(C/D) (A+B)×C/D
(A−B)/(C+D) (A−B)/(C+D) (A−B)/(C−D) (A−B)/(C−D)
(A−B)/(C×D) (A−B)/C/D (A−B)/(C/D) (A−B)×C/D
(A×B)/(C+D) A×B/(C+D) (A×B)/(C−D) A×B/(C−D)
(A×B)/(C×D) A×B/C/D (A×B)/(C/D) A×B×C/D
(A/B)/(C+D) A/(B+C)/D (A/B)/(C−D) A/(B−C)/D
(A/B)/(C×D) A/B/C/D (A/B)/(C/D) A×B/C/D
(A+ (B+C)) +D A+B+C+D (A+ (B−C)) +D A+B+C−D
(A+ (B×C)) +D A×B+C+D (A+ (B/C)) +D A/B+C+D
(A−(B+C)) +D A+B−C−D (A−(B−C)) +D A+B+C−D
(A−(B×C)) +D A+B−C×D (A−(B/C)) +D A+B−C/D
(A×(B+C)) +D (A+B)×C+D (A×(B−C)) +D (A−B)×C+D
(A×(B×C)) +D A×B×C+D (A×(B/C)) +D A×B/C+D
(A/(B+C)) +D A/(B+C) +D (A/(B−C)) +D A/(B−C) +D
(A/(B×C)) +D A/B/C+D (A/(B/C)) +D A×B/C+D
(A+ (B+C))−D A+B+C−D (A+ (B−C))−D A+B−C−D
(A+ (B×C))−D A×B+C−D (A+ (B/C))−D A/B+C−D
(A−(B+C))−D A−B−C−D (A−(B−C))−D A+B−C−D
(A−(B×C))−D A−B×C−D (A−(B/C))−D A−B/C−D
(A×(B+C))−D (A+B)×C−D (A×(B−C))−D (A−B)×C−D
(A×(B×C))−D A×B×C−D (A×(B/C))−D A×B/C−D
(A/(B+C))−D A/(B+C)−D (A/(B−C))−D A/(B−C)−D
(A/(B×C))−D A/B/C−D (A/(B/C))−D A×B/C−D
(A+ (B+C))×D (A+B+C)×D (A+ (B−C))×D (A+B−C)×D
(A+ (B×C))×D (A×B+C)×D (A+ (B/C))×D (A/B+C)×D
(A−(B+C))×D (A−B−C)×D (A−(B−C))×D (A+B−C)×D
(A−(B×C))×D (A−B×C)×D (A−(B/C))×D (A−B/C)×D
(A×(B+C))×D (A+B)×C×D (A×(B−C))×D (A−B)×C×D
(A×(B×C))×D A×B×C×D (A×(B/C))×D A×B×C/D
(A/(B+C))×D A×B/(C+D) (A/(B−C))×D A×B/(C−D)
(A/(B×C))×D A×B/C/D (A/(B/C))×D A×B×C/D
(A+ (B+C))/D (A+B+C)/D (A+ (B−C))/D (A+B−C)/D
(A+ (B×C))/D (A×B+C)/D (A+ (B/C))/D (A/B+C)/D
(A−(B+C))/D (A−B−C)/D (A−(B−C))/D (A+B−C)/D
(A−(B×C))/D (A−B×C)/D (A−(B/C))/D (A−B/C)/D
(A×(B+C))/D (A+B)×C/D (A×(B−C))/D (A−B)×C/D
(A×(B×C))/D A×B×C/D (A×(B/C))/D A×B/C/D
(A/(B+C))/D A/(B+C)/D (A/(B−C))/D A/(B−C)/D
(A/(B×C))/D A/B/C/D (A/(B/C))/D A×B/C/D
((A+B) +C) +D A+B+C+D ((A−B) +C) +D A+B+C−D
((A×B) +C) +D A×B+C+D ((A/B) +C) +D A/B+C+D
((A+B)−C) +D A+B+C−D ((A−B)−C) +D A+B−C−D
((A×B)−C) +D A×B+C−D ((A/B)−C) +D A/B+C−D
((A+B)×C) +D (A+B)×C+D ((A−B)×C) +D (A−B)×C+D
((A×B)×C) +D A×B×C+D ((A/B)×C) +D A×B/C+D
47
Preprint. Under Review.
Table 16: Expressions and their Canonical Forms (Patterns) (Page 4 of 4)
Expression Pattern Expression Pattern
((A+B)/C) +D (A+B)/C+D ((A−B)/C) +D (A−B)/C+D
((A×B)/C) +D A×B/C+D ((A/B)/C) +D A/B/C+D
((A+B) +C)−D A+B+C−D ((A−B) +C)−D A+B−C−D
((A×B) +C)−D A×B+C−D ((A/B) +C)−D A/B+C−D
((A+B)−C)−D A+B−C−D ((A−B)−C)−D A−B−C−D
((A×B)−C)−D A×B−C−D ((A/B)−C)−D A/B−C−D
((A+B)×C)−D (A+B)×C−D ((A−B)×C)−D (A−B)×C−D
((A×B)×C)−D A×B×C−D ((A/B)×C)−D A×B/C−D
((A+B)/C)−D (A+B)/C−D ((A−B)/C)−D (A−B)/C−D
((A×B)/C)−D A×B/C−D ((A/B)/C)−D A/B/C−D
((A+B) +C)×D (A+B+C)×D ((A−B) +C)×D (A+B−C)×D
((A×B) +C)×D (A×B+C)×D ((A/B) +C)×D (A/B+C)×D
((A+B)−C)×D (A+B−C)×D ((A−B)−C)×D (A−B−C)×D
((A×B)−C)×D (A×B−C)×D ((A/B)−C)×D (A/B−C)×D
((A+B)×C)×D (A+B)×C×D ((A−B)×C)×D (A−B)×C×D
((A×B)×C)×D A×B×C×D ((A/B)×C)×D A×B×C/D
((A+B)/C)×D (A+B)×C/D ((A−B)/C)×D (A−B)×C/D
((A×B)/C)×D A×B×C/D ((A/B)/C)×D A×B/C/D
((A+B) +C)/D (A+B+C)/D ((A−B) +C)/D (A+B−C)/D
((A×B) +C)/D (A×B+C)/D ((A/B) +C)/D (A/B+C)/D
((A+B)−C)/D (A+B−C)/D ((A−B)−C)/D (A−B−C)/D
((A×B)−C)/D (A×B−C)/D ((A/B)−C)/D (A/B−C)/D
((A+B)×C)/D (A+B)×C/D ((A−B)×C)/D (A−B)×C/D
((A×B)×C)/D A×B×C/D ((A/B)×C)/D A×B/C/D
((A+B)/C)/D (A+B)/C/D ((A−B)/C)/D (A−B)/C/D
((A×B)/C)/D A×B/C/D ((A/B)/C)/D A/B/C/D
48
Preprint. Under Review.
I ACKNOWLEDGINGLLM USAGE
At various stages of the project, we received the aid of LLMs. Here, we report all such use cases.
• We received aid on writing the code to automate the process of extracting and canonicalizing
an expression. The list of n= 4 patterns were initially manually mapped and were used as
test cases for the LLM generated code. All code was manually verified.
• We received aid on writing the code to draw plots from existing data that were generated
from human-written scripts. All code was manually verified.
• We used an LLM for copy-editing tasks, such as rephrasing sentences to improve clarity,
conciseness, and flow, as well as for correcting grammatical errors.
49