SA-ADP: Sensitivity-Aware Adaptive Differential
Privacy for Large Language Models
Author’s draft for soliciting feedback - December 2, 2025
Stella Etuk
School of Information Technology
Carleton University
stellaetuk@cmail.carleton.ca
Ashraf Matrawy
School of Information Technology
Carleton University
ashraf.matrawy@carleton.ca
Abstract—Despite advances in the use of large language
models (LLMs) in downstream tasks, their ability to memorize
information has raised privacy concerns. Therefore, protecting
personally identifiable information (PII) during LLM training
remains a fundamental challenge. Conventional methods like
Differential Privacy-Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD)
provide robust privacy protection via uniform noising, protecting
PII regardless of its distinct sensitivity. This comes at the expense
of the model’s utility, leading to a trade-off. In this paper, we
propose SA-ADP, a sensitivity-aware approach that allocates
noise based on the sensitivity of individual PII. We evaluated our
method on four datasets (ABCD, CUSTOMERSIM, Wikitext-2,
and UNSW-NB15 ). Our results show that SA-ADP achieves
results comparable to the baseline (No-DP) and the conventional
DP-SGD. This means that our method did not degrade the
model’s utility while still maintaining strong privacy protection.
Index Terms—Adaptive Differential Privacy, Large Language
Models, Sensitivity Scoring, Personally Identifiable Information
I. INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT by OpenAI
and others have significantly advanced the field of natural
language processing [1], powering applications such as
chatbots, content generation, translation, and more. These
models are trained on a large corpus of real-world data [2] that
often contains Personally Identifiable Information (PII), such
as names, email addresses, phone numbers, and other sensitive
information. This poses a serious privacy risk, as LLMs can
memorize and expose such private information during model
inference [3].
The risk of PII leakage highlights the critical importance of
privacy protection during LLM training and fine-tuning [4].
Differential Privacy (DP) offers a promising solution, with
Differential Privacy Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD)
[5] being a widely used variant. DP-SGD adds calibrated
noise to clipped gradients during training, thereby obscuring
the contribution of any single data point and mitigating
privacy risks. Although this technique improves privacy, it
also introducesa trade-off between the model’s utility and
privacy, where excessive noise reduces model performance,
whereas insufficient noise compromises privacy [6].A further
limitationof standard DP methods is the uniform application
of noise across all tokens, without considering differences
in sensitivity. For instance, a Social Security Number (SSN)
poses far greater risk than a first name, yet both are treated
equally under conventional DP-SGD. This approach results in
inefficiencies in the privacy–utility trade-off.
To address this limitation, we propose a textbf
Sensitivity-Aware Adaptive Differential Privacy (SA-ADP)
mechanism that adaptively adds noise to gradients based on
token sensitivity. This proposed approach follows a three-stage
pipeline: Detection, Scoring, and Noising. First, we use PII
detection algorithms to detect sensitive tokens within the
training data. Next, each token is assigned a normalized
sensitivity score (0.0–1.0) based on its frequency, linkability,
and datatype classification. Finally, we apply per-token
adaptive noise during gradient clipping, with high-sensitivity
tokens receiving stronger noise (0.51 - 1.00) and low noise to
tokens classified as low sensitivity (0.01 - 0.50). The R ´enyi
Differential Privacy (RDP) accountant is then used to track
and bound the cumulative privacy loss budget throughout the
training process, thereby guaranteeing privacy [7].
This paper makes the followingcontributions:
1a) We propose Sensitivity-Aware Adaptive Differential
Privacy (SA-ADP), a novel framework for LLM fine-tuning
that adjusts noise levels according to token-level PII
sensitivity.
1b) We design an adaptive Detection–Scoring–Noising pipeline
that introduces token-level sensitivity scoring based on
frequency, linkability, and data type classification, enabling
fine-grained, adaptive privacy protection.
2) We implement and evaluate SA-ADP on four datasets
(UNSW, ABCD, Wikitext-2, and CUSTOMERSIM
dataset), demonstrating that our token-level adaptive
approach maintains a strong privacy level while preserving
model utility across diverse data scenarios.
II. RELATEDWORK
Privacy Risks in LLM: Recent studies have shown that
LLMs can memorize and reproduce sensitive content from
their training data [8], particularly when trained on large-scale,
unfiltered datasets. This has also raised serious concerns
about the development and deployment of LLMs in sensitive
sectors like healthcare and financial institutions. LLMs can
arXiv:2512.01748v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
infer personal attributes from user input beyond memorized
data [9]. To mitigate these risks, researchers have proposed
various methods, such as Differential Privacy (DP) [10], data
anonymisation for text data [11], and data scrubbing with
machine unlearning [12], self-normalizing DP methods as
proposed by Ibitoye et al. [13], DP with stochastic gradient
clipping (DP-SGD) [5], all in an attempt to preserve the
privacy of PIIs. While DP-SGD operates at the per-sample or
per-record level, clipping each sample’s gradient and applying
uniform Gaussian noise to the aggregated gradient, our
approach focuses on per-token adaptive noise injection based
on PII sensitivity, enabling fine-grained privacy protection.
Differential Privacy: Differential Privacy (DP) introduced
by Dwork [14] is a framework that ensures that the presence
or absence of any individual data point does not affect
the output. Building on this, Abadi et al. [5] proposed
”Differential Privacy Stochastic Gradient Descent” (DP-SGD),
which applies per-sample gradients clipping and adds Gaussian
noise uniformly to the gradients during model training. This
framework has become one of the most prominent techniques
for data preservation. While these methods ensured privacy, the
trade-off was the model’s utility. Since then, different variants
of the DP-SGD method have surfaced to train efficiently [15]
or improve noise calibration [3], [16] in an attempt to enhance
model utility while maintaining privacy. Still, none of these
methods have considered the unique sensitivity of each PIIs
token contained in the training data before adding noise.
III. THEPROPOSEDSENSITIVITY-AWAREADAPTIVE
DIFFERENTIALPRIVACYMODEL(SA-ADP)
This section presents the architectural and algorithmic
components of our proposed SA-ADP framework for
privacy-preserving fine-tuning of LLMs, with a primary focus
on balancing privacy and utility.
As shown in Fig. 1, we proposeSensitivity Aware
Adaptive Differential Privacy (SA-ADP), which introduces
token-specific privacy modulation based on PII sensitivity.
The mechanism is built by introducing three core steps into
the training pipeline: PII detection, sensitivity scoring, and
adaptive noise allocation. The following subsections explain
each core of our proposed method.
A. PII Detection
We utilize a LangChain-based privacy agent powered by
LLaMA 3 (via Ollama) [17]–[19]to automatically extract PII
elements from structured text records. Each record is passed
to the agent with a task-specific prompt, and the model returns
a structured array listing PII fields and values. This detection
process is applied over a corpus of dataset entries.
B. Sensitivity Scoring
To enable token-level adaptive differential privacy, we first
identify and determine the sensitivity levels of the different
PII types (pi ) in the training data. This involves detecting PII
types and assigning each a sensitivity score based on three
dimensions (Frequency, Linkability, and Datatype) that could
reflect the risk level of a PII type [20]. Fig. 2 illustrates the
process used for this analysis.
1) Scoring Dimension:Each detected PII token is scored
along three dimensions:
•Frequency Score (S freq): This measures the rarity of PII
type in the dataset. Letp i denote thei-th detected PII type
in the dataset and letP={p 1, p2, . . . , pn}represent the
complete set of detected PII types.
Sfreq(pi) = 1−f(pi)
N (1)
wheref(p i)is the count of each PII typep i, andNis
the total number PII count in the dataset.
•Linkability Score (S link): Indicates how likely a PII type
can be linked with others. This is assessed by querying
an LLM agent:
Slink(pi) =
(
1,if PII type is linkable
0,otherwise (2)
•DataType Classification Score (S datatype): Determines
whether the PII type is legally recognized under global
privacy laws (e.g., GDPR, HIPAA):
Sdatatype(pi) =
(
1,if PII type is datatype protected
0,otherwise
(3)
2) Aggregated Privacy Sensitivity Index:The three scores
are combined into a unified privacy sensitivity indexS final ∈
[0,1]through a weighted linear combination:
Sfinal(pi) =W1·Sfreq(pi)+W2·Slink(pi)+W3·Sdatatype(pi)(4)
The weights were selected to emphasize rarity while
balancing contextual and regulatory importance. In this case,
we set: frequency = 0.4, linkability = 0.3, and datatype = 0.3
Algorithm 1:PII Sensitivity Scoring
Input:DatasetD, Detected PII setP
Output:Sensitivity score mappingS final(pi)for all
pi ∈P
Compute total PII count:N←count words(D);
foreachPII typep∈Pdo
Compute frequency score:S freq(p)←1− f(p)
N ;
Query LLM for linkability score:S link(p)∈ {0,1};
Query LLM for datatype classification score:
Sdatatype(p)∈ {0,1};
Compute final sensitivity score:;
Sfinal(p)←
0.4·S freq(p) + 0.3·Slink(p) + 0.3·Sdatatype(p);
3) Algorithm 1: Algorithmic Implementation:
2
Fig. 1. Gradient Perturbation in the SA-ADP Framework. At1, PII are
detected from the input data and passed to the scoring engine at2, where each
token is assigned a sensitivity score. An adaptively calibrated noise multiplier
is then computed and used at3to inject Gaussian noise adaptively into the
clipped gradients [5] during the backward pass, ensuring stronger perturbation
for high-sensitivity tokens and minimal distortion for low-sensitivity ones.
Fig. 2. PII Detection and Sensitivity Scoring. A detection agent processes
raw input to identify PII tokens. Each identified token is scored based on
frequency, linkability, and datatype parameters. The resulting sensitivity score
is used to inform adaptive privacy mechanisms.
C. Noise Calibration Strategy
Since the privacy guarantee in Differential Privacy (DP) is
defined by the budget parameterϵ, DP algorithms regulate
privacy by introducing a unitless Gaussian noiseσ, which is
calibrated inversely toϵinto the training data. [21]. To enable
fine-grained privacy control, our approach adaptively calibrates
σon a per-token basis ( for each PII type) using the computed
sensitivity scoresS final(pi) ∈[0,1]in equation 4. We have that:
ϵ= C
σ (5)
(where C is the clipping norm as proposed in the framework
of Abadi et al. [5]
The noise calibration strategy introduces a deterministic
mapping functionF:S final(pi) →σ, which assigns each token
a Gaussian noise scale according to its sensitivity:
σ=



σlow,if0.01≤S final(pi) ≤0.50
σhigh,if0.51≤S final(pi) ≤1.00
0,otherwise
(6)
Whereσ low andσ high are adjustable noise calibration
constants (in our experiments, 2.0 and 3.0, respectively). This
mapping ensures that higher-sensitivity tokens are injected
with stronger noise, while non-sensitive tokens are perturbed
minimally, thus preserving model utility.
Algorithm 2:Token-wise Noise Injection
Input:Token sequenceT= [t 1, . . . , tn], Sensitivity
scoresS= [s 1, . . . , sn], gradient vector
G= [g1, . . . , gn], noise mapM
Output:Noised gradient vector ˆG
fori←1tondo
σi ← M(si);// Map score to noise
level
ˆgi ←clip(g i, C);// Clip gradient norm
ifσ i >0then
ˆgi ←ˆgi +N(0, σ2
i C2I);// Add
Gaussian noise Adapted from the
core DP-SGD mechanism by Abadi
et al. [5]
end
Storeˆgi in ˆG
end
return ˆG
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Datasets: To evaluate the effectiveness of SA-ADP, we
fine-tune the GPT-2 base model on both unstructured and
structured datasets. For the unstructured dataset, we used the
Wikitext-2 Dataset, a natural language corpus commonly
used as a benchmark for language model performance [22].
We also considered two synthetic conversational datasets,
which include theABCD Datasetintroduced by Shi et al.
[15] and theCustomerSim Datasetused in [16]. Finally,
we used theUNSW-NB15network traffic dataset [23] for
structured data. This coverage ensures that the framework
is empirically validated across diverse data modalities where
privacy sensitivity and linguistic utility interact in different
ways.
Model Fine-tuning with SA-ADP: We fine-tune a
pre-trainedGPT-2model using our SA-ADP framework. The
training uses the Adam optimizer with a constant learning
rateη= 0.001, a batch size of 16, and a sequence length
of 512 over three epochs with a sample rateq= 0.1.
Differential privacy is achieved by applying adaptive Gaussian
noiseσ i ∈[3.0,2.0]and gradient clipping (C= 1.0) with
stronger noise assigned to more sensitive tokens and minimal
perturbation for less sensitive ones. We also implemented the
DP-SGD framework under the same hyperparameter tuning
for comparison.
3
Privacy Accounting: To quantify the privacy guarantees of
the method, we use R ´enyi Differential Privacy (RDP) as our
accounting framework, following the formulation introduced
by Mironov [7]. This approach enables cumulative tracking of
privacy loss budget (ϵ) across training steps. We use a fixed
R´enyi orderα= 32and a target deltaδ= 10 −5 for all runs.
The final privacy levels are computed using the standard RDP
conversion [7]
ϵ= min
α>1

ϵRDP, total(α) +log(1/δ)
α−1

.(7)
V. RESULTS ANDEVALUATION
This section presents the performance of our proposed
SA-ADP framework and the DP-SGD framework, evaluated
and compared using accuracy, perplexity, and privacy
budgeting metrics.
A.Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed SA-ADP
mechanism using two key dimensions.
Utility: To comprehensively evaluate the proposed SA-ADP
mechanism, we use both utility- and privacy-oriented
metrics. Utility is measured through classification accuracy
and language modeling perplexity. Accuracy reflects the
model’s ability to correctly classify or predict task-specific
labels, particularly relevant for structured datasets such
as UNSW-NB15. Perplexity measures how well the
model predicts token sequences, indicating fluency and
generalization; lower values signal outputs closer to natural
human language, which is essential for conversational datasets
such as ABCD.
Privacy: Privacy is quantified through the privacy loss
budget parameter(ϵ, δ)under the R ´enyi Differential Privacy
(RDP) framework. A lower value of indicates stronger privacy
levels, meaning the model’s output is less influenced by any
single training example. We adopted a fixedδ= 10 −5 for all
experiments to allow consistent comparisons between models.
The detailed evaluation metrics of our SA-ADP and
DP-SGD mechanisms across datasets are summarized in
Table I.
B.Results and Discussion
Privacy-Utility Trade-offs with SA-ADP:We evaluate the
SA-ADP framework across multiple benchmark datasets with
varying PII density (the proportion of tokens in a dataset
that are identified as PII, in contrast to datasets where most
tokens are non-PII). Compared with the baseline (No DP),
SA-ADP maintains comparable performance in both accuracy
and perplexity (Fig. 3 for the accuracy comparison and
Fig. 4 for the perplexity comparison), indicating that the
SA-ADP framework does not degrade the model. Compared
to DP-SGD, SA-ADP slightly outperforms it in perplexity
(lower is better) while maintaining a low privacy loss budget
(ϵ) across all datasets (See Table I). This is particularly evident
in conversational datasets (ABCD and CustomerSim) with low
PII density. For the Wikitext-2 benchmark, which has a higher
density of PII, a similar trend is observed, as the model does
not suffer significant degradation compared to the baseline
despite an increase in itsϵvalue.
Consistency of SA-ADP Across Structured and
Unstructured Data:Our framework was tested across datasets
spanning several domains (Structured and unstructured). In
the structured networking domain using the UNSW-NB15
dataset, DP-SGD performance decreased ( Fig.3 and Fig.4)
as noise increased, whereas SA-ADP maintained good
performance while still strongly preserving privacy. This
flexibility highlights the scalability of SA-ADP across
heterogeneous real-world scenarios These findings directly
address the limitations outlined in the problem statement. The
uniform noise of the conventional method either overprotects
low-sensitive tokens at the cost of utility or under-protects
high-sensitive tokens, creating privacy risks. SA-ADP
overcomes this by tailoring noise to token sensitivity.
Overall, the results suggest that moving from global to
token-sensitive privacy mechanisms is a decisive step toward
deployable, regulation-aligned LLM fine-tuning, particularly
in PII-dense domains.
Fig. 3. Accuracy Comparison between SA-ADP and DP-SGD across all three
Datasets.
Fig. 4. Perplexity Comparison between SA-ADP and DP-SGD across all
three Datasets. Lower perplexity indicates better fluency.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper introducedSensitivity-Aware Adaptive
Differential Privacy (SA-ADP), a token-level mechanism
4
TABLE I
COMPARISON OFBASELINE(NODP), SA-ADP,ANDDPSGD ACROSSDATASETS
Datasets
Baseline (No DP) SA-ADP DPSGDσ=2 DPSGDσ=3
Accuracy Perplexity Accuracy Perplexity Epsilon Accuracy Perplexity Epsilon Accuracy Perplexity Epsilon
UNSW-NB15 76.67 1.05 76.92 1.05 0.1869 76.48 3.33 1.7246 5.82 8.22 1.0712
ABCD 97.69 1.03 97.68 1.03 0.1858 97.73 1.09 1.5039 97.72 1.10 0.9401
Wikitext-2 62.55 2.95 60.96 3.05 0.7697 38.12 20.17 2.7711 25.01 133.51 1.1259
CUSTOMERSIM 94.20 1.18 94.22 1.18 0.6399 94.20 1.38 2.5096 94.21 1.51 1.5319
Fig. 5. Privacy budget between ADP and DP-SGD across all Datasets.
that adaptively scales noise according to the sensitivity of
each token. Unlike conventional DP-SGD, which applies
uniform perturbation, SA-ADP aligns privacy noise with token
importance, thereby achieving a tighter privacy-utility balance.
Across four datasets: UNSW-NB15, ABCD, Wikitext-2, and
CustomerSim, SA-ADP reduced the average privacy budget
ϵby approximately75%while maintaining about99%of
baseline utility.
These results demonstrate that a sensitivity-driven privacy
control can overcome the inefficiencies of uniform noising
and enable practical privacy preservation in PII-dense
environments. Ultimately, SA-ADP provides a modular and
adaptive framework for privacy-preserving learning that is
well-suited to a range of data sensitivity regimes and
regulatory requirements.
REFERENCES
[1] A. P. Wibawa, F. Kurniawanet al., “Advancements in natural language
processing: Implications, challenges, and future directions,”Telematics
and Informatics Reports, vol. 16, p. 100173, 2024.
[2] Y . Ju and H. Ma, “Training data for large language model,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.07715, 2024.
[3] T. Singh, H. Aditya, V . K. Madisetti, and A. Bahga, “Whispered
tuning: Data privacy preservation in fine-tuning llms through differential
privacy,”Journal of Software Engineering and Applications, vol. 17,
no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2024.
[4] Z. Charles, A. Ganesh, R. McKenna, H. B. McMahan, N. Mitchell,
K. Pillutla, and K. Rush, “Fine-tuning large language models with
user-level differential privacy,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07737, 2024.
[5] M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov,
K. Talwar, and L. Zhang, “Deep learning with differential privacy,” in
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, 2016, pp. 308–318.
[6] S. Das, C. Kolling, M. A. Khan, M. Amani, B. Ghosh, Q. Wu,
T. Speicher, and K. P. Gummadi, “Revisiting privacy, utility, and
efficiency trade-offs when fine-tuning large language models,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.13313, 2025.
[7] I. Mironov, “R ´enyi differential privacy,” in2017 IEEE 30th Computer
Security Foundations Symposium (CSF). IEEE, 2017, pp. 263–275.
[8] N. Carlini, C. Liu, U. Erlingsson, J. Kos, and D. Song, “The secret
sharer: Evaluating and testing unintended memorization in neural
networks,” in28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19),
2019, pp. 267–284.
[9] R. Staab, M. Vero, M. Balunovi ´c, and M. Vechev, “Beyond
memorization: Violating privacy via inference with large language
models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07298, 2023.
[10] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating noise
to sensitivity in private data analysis,” inTheory of cryptography
conference. Springer, 2006, pp. 265–284.
[11] P. Lison, I. Pil ´an, D. Sanchez, M. Batet, and L. Øvrelid, “Anonymisation
models for text data: State of the art, challenges and future directions,”
inProceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2021, pp.
4188–4203.
[12] J. Ren, Y . Xing, Y . Cui, C. C. Aggarwal, and H. Liu, “Sok: Machine
unlearning for large language models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09227,
2025.
[13] O. Ibitoye, M. O. Shafiq, and A. Matrawy, “Differentially private
self-normalizing neural networks for adversarial robustness in federated
learning,”Computers & Security, vol. 116, p. 102631, 2022.
[14] C. Dwork, “Differential privacy,” inInternational colloquium on
automata, languages, and programming. Springer, 2006, pp. 1–12.
[15] W. Shi, R. Shea, S. Chen, C. Zhang, R. Jia, and Z. Yu, “Just fine-tune
twice: Selective differential privacy for large language models,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.07667, 2022.
[16] W. Shi, A. Cui, E. Li, R. Jia, and Z. Yu, “Selective differential privacy
for language modeling,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.12944, 2021.
[17] H. Chase and L. Team, “Langchain: Building applications with llms
through composability,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
langchain-ai/langchain
[18] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian,
A. Al-Dahle, and et al., “The llama 3 herd of models,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
21783
[19] H. Lin and T. Safi, “ollamar: An r package for running large language
models,”Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 10, no. 105, p. 7211,
Jan. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/
joss.07211
[20] E. McCallister,Guide to protecting the confidentiality of personally
identifiable information. Diane Publishing, 2010.
[21] P. Nanayakkara, M. A. Smart, R. Cummings, G. Kaptchuk, and E. M.
Redmiles, “What are the chances? explaining the epsilon parameter in
differential privacy,” in32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX
Security 23), 2023, pp. 1613–1630.
[22] S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher, “Pointer sentinel
mixture models,”arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.07843, 2016.
[23] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set),”
in2015 military communications and information systems conference
(MilCIS). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
5