The Necessity of Imperfection: Reversing Model Collapse
via Simulating Cognitive Boundedness
Zhongjie Jiang
showsnow1427@163.com
Abstract
Although synthetic data is widely promoted as a rem-
edy, its prevailing production paradigm—one optimiz-
ing for statistical smoothness—systematically removes
the long-tail, cognitively grounded irregularities that
characterize human text. Prolonged training on such
statistically optimal but cognitively impoverished data
accelerates model collapse.
This paper proposes a paradigm shift: instead of
imitating the surface properties of data, we simu-
late the cognitive processes that generate human text.
We introduce the Prompt-driven Cognitive Computing
Framework (PMCSF), whose core consists of a Cogni-
tive State Decoder (CSD) that reverse-engineers un-
structured text into structured cognitive vectors, and
a Cognitive Text Encoder (CTE) that re-materializes
these states into text enriched with human-typical im-
perfections via mathematically defined Cognitive Per-
turbation Operators.
The framework is validated through a two-stage ob-
jective evaluation pipeline. In cognitive codec verifi-
cation, CTE text yields a Jensen–Shannon divergence
of 0.0614 from human text (vs. 0.4431 for standard
LLM output), passes double-blind professional media
review, and achieves an intraclass correlation coeffi-
cientICC >0.9for cognitive profile alignment across
heterogeneous models. In functional gain evaluation,
isomorphicstresstestsintheA-sharemarketshowthat
strategies incorporating CTE-generated data reduce
maximum drawdown by 47.4% during the 2015 crash
and deliver 8.6% Defensive Alpha, exceeding transac-
tion costs by a factor of 33.
Our findings demonstrate that modelling hu-
man cognitive limitations—not copying surface
data—enables synthetic data with genuine functional
gain, offering a viable technical pathway toward
resolving the AI data-collapse crisis.
Keywords:Synthetic Data; Model Collapse;
Bounded Rationality; Cognitive Codec; Cognitive La-
tent Space Alignment; Cognitive Inter-lingua
1 Introduction
1.1 StructuralBottlenecksinAIDevel-
opment: Statistical Convergence
and the Loss of Cognitive Texture
Central to the evolution of artificial intelligence, and
mostnotablywithinthedomainoflargelanguagemod-
els (LLMs), lies a structural paradox; specifically, the
consumption rate of anthropogenic data, upon which
algorithmic advancement relies, vastly outstrips its
natural genesis. Implicit in this disparity is the likeli-
hood that high-quality human data reserves approach
exhaustion [1]; concurrently, synthetic data, previously
hypothesized as a viable substitute, has manifested as
a primary catalyst for model collapse [3].
Situated at the root of model collapse are the fun-
damental distinctions between generative mechanisms;
standard LLMs, relying principally on autoregressive
probability prediction, gravitate toward statistically
optimal solutions—outputs strictly aligned with the
highest probability within the training distribution.
This logic prioritizes fluency and convergence, thereby
systematically excising traits inherent to human lan-
guage, specificallythoseshapedbycognitiveload, emo-
tional oscillation, and heuristics and biases [14],[15].
It remains, however, precisely these deviations from
optimality, termed herein ascognitive texture, that
encapsulate the diversity and authenticity of human
cognition. The utilization of denoised, AI-generated
text for recursive training precipitates the erasure of
long-tail cognitive information; consequently, a grad-
ual homogenization of behavioral patterns ensues.
Adopted within this research is a human-AI collabo-
rative R&D paradigm designed to expedite a 0-to-1
proof-of-concept under resource constraints; such an
approach delineates a potential trajectory for the field.
1.2 The Core Breakthrough: Simulat-
ing the “Cause” Behind the Cogni-
tive Mirror
To mitigate the aforementioned dilemma, this study
proposes a paradigm shift; effective synthetic data gen-
eration, rather than ceasing at the statistical imitation
of surface appearance, must transition to a deep simu-
lation of the cause underlying real-world text, namely,
1
arXiv:2512.01354v1  [cs.AI]  1 Dec 2025
the bounded rationality governing human decision-
making [4], [5].
Foundational to this inquiry is theCognitive
Mirror Hypothesis; positing that, as human text
emerges from constrained cognitive resources, the cog-
nitive state responsible for its generation remains the-
oretically reversible. Should the reverse-engineering,
or decoding, of structured cognitive states from text
prove feasible, it appears plausible that forward engi-
neering, or encoding, could reconstruct text from these
states under controlled cognitive constraints.
Predicatedonthispremise, therequirementforAIto
pursue statistically optimal outputs becomes obsolete.
Delineated instead is a constraining framework that
compels the simulation of a human agent attempting
to produce a satisficing, or merely adequate, response
under cognitively limited conditions; included within
this simulation are the non-linearities influenced by bi-
ological neural noise.
1.3 Methodology Preview: The PM-
CSF Framework and Two-Stage
Objective Validation
Building on this foundation, the present study con-
structs aPrompt-driven Cognitive Computing
Framework (PMCSF)—a dual-engine system en-
gineered for inverse operations that encompasses two
core components:
•Cognitive State Decoder (CSD):Tasked with
the inverse mapping of cognitive states, this com-
ponent translates unstructured natural language
text into a 17-dimensional cognitive state vec-
tor space via dimensionality reduction, thereby
achieving a structured representation of latent
psychological traits.
•Cognitive Text Encoder (CTE):Charged
with the forward simulation of bounded rational-
ity, this component leverages a dual-layer cogni-
tive simulation architecture: the macro layer in-
ternalizes cognitive priors to construct decision-
making scenarios constrained by limited mental
capacity or time pressure, while the micro layer
invokes cognitive perturbation operators to sys-
tematically introduce irrational fluctuations.
To validate the efficacy of this paradigm, the study
devises a progressive validation strategy spanning mor-
phological fidelity to functional gain:
•Cognitive Codec Mechanism Validation:
Employs multi-dimensional validation via double-
blind ecological tests, computational linguis-
tic analysis, and cross-model consistency tests
(N=26) to assess the decoding consistency of the
CSD and the encoding fidelity of the CTE.
•Functional Gain Validation:Subjects the syn-
thetic data to stress testing within the A-share
market, a complex system characterized by high-
frequency feedback; given the financial market’s
extreme sensitivity to emotional noise and irra-
tional behavior, this test aims to verify whether
the synthetic data effectively complements the
human long-tail cognitive signals filtered out by
mainstream models—a hypothesis for which the
financial market’s sensitivity to emotional noise
and irrationality serves as an optimal crucible.
1.4 Contributions of This Study
The primary contribution of this research resides in
challenging the mainstream rational paradigm of AI
development, proposing and empirically validating a
new design principle: “Controlled Non-Optimality.”
Contributions span three primary levels:
•Theoretical Innovation:The PMCSF posits
a 17-dimensional affective vector space as an
intermediate cognitive language shared by hu-
mans and machines, elucidating that irrational
thinking is not incalculable noise but high-
dimensional information encapsulating “Cognitive
Invariants”—structures amenable to representa-
tion and reconstruction.
•Methodological Innovation:Constructs a se-
mantic projection protocol that decodes the im-
plicit, high-dimensional machine cognition within
modelsintoanexplicit17-dimensionalhumancog-
nitive coordinate system, thereby forging a path-
way between LLMs and human thought/emotion.
•Empirical Innovation:Furnishes evidence for
the “enabling value” of synthetic data within
a high-fidelity simulation of the A-share mar-
ket; under realistic constraints—including trans-
action costs and risk metrics—it demonstrates
the risk management advantages and robustness
of cognitive-enhanced synthetic data in extreme
market environments.
2 Theoretical Foundations and
Related Work
2.1 Starting Point: Data Exhaustion
and “Statistical Mode Collapse”
Addressing the increasingly severe Curse of Recursion
[3] plaguing contemporary AI development, this study
takes root in a growing crisis of data reliability: as
high-quality human data depletes [1], reliance on AI-
generated synthetic data for model training has tran-
sitioned from a discretionary practice to an existen-
tial necessity. Yet the prevailing paradigm for syn-
thetic data generation harbors a critical flaw: stan-
2
dard large language models (LLMs)—trained via Max-
imum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)—exhibit a sys-
tematic bias toward generating samples aligned with
the statistical mode of their training distribution.
This yields a predilection for text that is syntactically
smoothed, statistically common, and grammatically
conventional—traits that filter out the idiosyncrasies
(e.g., hesitation, logical leaps) defining authentic hu-
man expression.
Concurrent with this, such formally standardized
text is polluting contemporary content production. A
2024 NewsGuard report [2] documents thousands of
websites leveraging AI to mass-produce low-quality
content rife with factual errors; training models on
such data, the study argues, will inevitably degrade
the performance of next-generation systems [3, 18].
The root cause lies in LLMs’ pursuit of statistical
optimality: by converging toward the mean of the
trainingdistribution, thesemodelssystematicallyerase
the “noise”—the irregularities andcognitive tex-
ture—that distinguishes human language from algo-
rithmic output. Over time, this process ofStatistical
ModeCollapseerodesthediversityofsyntheticdata,
setting in motion the degenerative cycle ofModel
Collapsewhere AI systems lose the ability to rep-
resent the tails of the original data distribution.
2.2 Theoretical Cornerstone: Bounded
Rationality as the Authentic Tex-
ture of Cognition
The detectability of AI-generated text by classifica-
tion models stems not from inherent low quality but
from an overweening structural perfection—a trait ab-
sent in authentic human expression. Human language,
the study posits, derives its authenticity fromCog-
nitive Non-Optimality—the imperfections arising
from bounded cognitive resources, emotional flux, and
heuristic reasoning. This insight rests on three foun-
dational axioms from cognitive science:
•Bounded Rationality [4, 13]:Nobel laureate
Herbert Simon’s theory posits that humans, con-
strained by incomplete information, limited cog-
nitive capacity, and temporal pressures, abandon
the pursuit of optimal decision-making in favor
of a satisficing strategy—accepting solutions that
meet a threshold of adequacy rather than perfec-
tion. This “good enough” heuristic, the study ar-
gues, is not a flaw but a defining feature of human
cognition.
•Heuristics and Biases [5]:Research by Kah-
neman and Tversky demonstrates that humans
rely on mental shortcuts (heuristics) for rapid
judgment, yet these shortcuts generate system-
atic biases (e.g., loss aversion, recency bias).
These biases, the study contends, introduce emo-
tional fluctuations and perspectival narrowness
into text—traits that standard AI systems filter
out in their quest for statistical fluency.
•Competence vs. Performance [6]:Noam
Chomsky’s distinction betweencompetence(ide-
alized grammatical knowledge) andperformance
(error-prone, hesitant linguistic output) underpins
a key critique of AI: while LLMs excel at replicat-
ing the rigid perfection of competence, they fail
to capture the living, dynamic performance of hu-
man language.
Implicit in these findings is a paradox: bounded
rationality and cognitive imperfections should not
be treated as mere noise; they constitute the au-
thentic texture of human cognition. For synthetic
data to possess training value, the study argues, it
must faithfully simulate these non-optimal character-
istics—reproducing the “irrational” fluctuations that
make human language both diverse and meaningful.
2.3 ImplementationPathway: LLMsas
a Cognitive Simulation Platform
Within academic circles, a consensus is coalescing:
LLMs operate not merely as text generators but as
a universal cognitive simulation platform [16, 17]. The
feasibility of this framing rests on two pillars:
•Implicit Pattern Representation:Through
massive pre-training on human text, the internal
parameter spaceΘ i of LLMs has formed a high-
dimensional representation of human expression
patterns—including the statistical features aris-
ing from bounded rationality. Yet under default
generation strategies (e.g., top-k sampling), these
features are systematically smoothed, rendering
them invisible in standard outputs.
•Cognitive Plasticity:By introducing external
constraints—specifically, the PMCSF framework
proposed in this study—researchers can guide the
generation process to deviate from the path of sta-
tistical optimality. This activation of the latent
distribution’s “irrational, highly emotional, low-
probability” regions enables targeted simulation of
specific cognitive states, transforming LLMs from
mere text generators into tools for modeling hu-
man thought.
3
2.4 Operationalization Mechanism:
Mathematical Compilation from
Psychological Principles to Cogni-
tive Perturbation Operators
Building on this theoretical framework, the study
transmutes prompt engineering—long an empirical ex-
ercise in parameter tuning—into a rigorous method-
ology of Cognitive Mathematical Compilation. Each
Cognitive Perturbation Operatorin the PMCSF
framework is a mathematical mapping of a specific cog-
nitive psychology principle, designed to inject “biolog-
ical noise” into the text generation process:
•Sentence Length Oscillation Operator
Ls(n):
Ls(n)∝sin(ωn) +µ(1)
Drawing on Baddeley’s Working Memory Model
[8] and Sweller’s Cognitive Load Theory [9], this
operator simulates the “load-release” cycles of hu-
man cognition by forcing sentence length to os-
cillate rhythmically between long, complex struc-
tures (high cognitive load) and short, declarative
phrases (low load). The sinusoidal function, the
study argues, mirrors the biological constraints of
breathing and attention, introducing a “natural”
variability absent in standard AI output.
•Probability Perturbation Operatorf w(t):
fw(t)≈p(t)×(1−β) +ϵ(2)
To simulate human “hesitation” and “non-optimal
choice,” this operator introduces controlled noiseϵ
into the token selection process, forcing the model
to deviate from the probability peaks of the train-
ing distribution. The result is text that retains
the viability of long-tail vocabulary—words and
phrases that, while statistically unlikely, are cen-
tral to authentic human expression.
•Associative Leap Operator:
cos(θcontext, θword)<0.5(3)
Corresponding to nonlinear associative leaps in
human thought (e.g., topic shifts triggered by ex-
ternal stimuli), this operator sets a semantic dis-
tance threshold for token generation. By allowing
tokens with low cosine similarity to the current
context, the model breaks free from its inherent
linear logical inertia, producing text that mirrors
the “unpredictable” jumps of human dialogue.
Collectively, these operators form the micro-
foundation of the CTE (Cognitive Text Encoder)—a
component designed to ensure synthetic data is not
random gibberish but text that conforms to biological
cognitive patterns. The study grounds this design in
Gigerenzer’s theory of adaptive toolboxes [24], which
posits that human decision-making in complex envi-
ronments relies on “fast and frugal” heuristics rather
than complex Bayesian optimization. The perturba-
tion operators, therefore, are not mere noise; they
are mathematical simulations of theEcological Ra-
tionalityinherent in human thinking—adaptive im-
perfections that enable survival in uncertain environ-
ments.
3 The Prompt-driven Cognitive
Computing Framework
3.1 Framework Design Philosophy: A
Human-AI Universal “Cognitive
Codec Protocol”
Predicated on a generative architecture which draws
its theoretical validity from the Cognitive Mirror Hy-
pothesis, this study explicates the Prompt-driven Cog-
nitive Computing Framework (PMCSF). Designed to
mitigate the erosion of Cognitive Texture in standard
LLMs—an artifact of their systematic prioritization
of statistical smoothing—the framework establishes a
bidirectional mapping protocol between natural lan-
guage and cognitive states. Central to this initiative
is the computable representation of human Bounded
Rationality, a core objective underpinned by the hy-
pothesis that cognitive states and linguistic outputs
possess reversible mappability.
Consequently, PMCSF functions as a universal
Human-AI Cognitive Codec protocol,comprisingtwo
inverse operational engines:
•Cognitive State Decoder (CSD): Function-
ing asthe “reading” engine (inverse engineer-
ing), this component maps unstructured human
text onto a 17-dimensional cognitive state vector
space via dimensionality reduction.This pro-
cess,whichextracts the underlying cognitive
state, translatestheambiguityofnaturallanguage
into a structured, machine-interpretable format.
•Cognitive Text Encoder (CTE): Serving as
the “writing” engine (forward engineering), the
CTE reconstructs structured cognitive states into
text imbued with human characteristicsunder
the constraints of controlled bounded rationality.
Anchored bya dual-layer architecture—macro-
anchoring for satisficing and micro-perturbation
for cognitive noise—this designdistinguishes
PMCSF from conventional generative models,
whichtypically prioritize statistical optimality
over authentic linguistic variation.
4
Figure 1: Architecture of the Prompt-driven Cogni-
tive Computing Framework (PMCSF). Operating as a
“Cognitive Codec”, the system incorporates two inverse
engines: CSD (dimensionality reduction) and CTE (re-
construction). The diagram delineates the invariant
17-Dim Cognitive State Vector serving as the inter-
mediate language, alongside CTE’s dual-layer design
(Macro-Anchoring & Micro-Perturbation) for simulat-
ing bounded rationality. This topology—grounded in
the hypothesis of cognitive invariants—suggests struc-
tural stability across diverse AI models and contexts.
3.2 Component 1: Cognitive State De-
coder (CSD): The Inverse Engi-
neering of Cognition
Addressingthe challenge of interpreting human lin-
guistic inputs through the quantification of ambigu-
ous natural language, the CSDdivergesfrom stan-
dard LLMs.Whileconventional models prioritize
statistical likelihood over cognitive fidelity, the CSD
isengineeredto capture the “tails” of linguistic
variation—those idiosyncratic expressionsthatreflect
bounded rationality and emotional flux.
3.2.1 Construction of the 17-Dimensional
Cognitive State Vector Space
Synthesizingdiscrete and dimensional emotion mod-
els, this studydevelopeda 17-dimensional vec-
tor spacegroundedin cognitive psychology axioms,
whichserves as the system’s Cognitive Inter-lingua.
Structuredto capture both universal and domain-
specific states, the dimensions encompass:
•Basic Emotion Layer: Drawing onEkman’s
discrete emotion model [21], this layerincorpo-
ratescore basis vectors including joy, sadness,
anger, fear, trust, disgust, surprise, and anticipa-
tion—statespositedto be invariant across cul-
tural and linguistic contexts.
•Cognitive Regulation Layer: Leveraging
Russell’s dimensional emotion model [22], this
layerintegratesconstructs such as intensity
(Arousal), agency (Dominance), certainty, and
temporality,whichmodulate how basic emotions
are manifested in language.
•Domain-Specialized Layer: Tailored tothe
financial trading context, this layerincludes
higher-order cognitive states such as FOMO (Fear
Of Missing Out), Greed, Regret, and Uncer-
tainty—statesthatdrive market behavior yet are
frequently filtered out by standard LLMs due to
their statistical rarity.
Figure 2: 17-Dimensional Cognitive State Vector Com-
parison. Radar chart visualizing distinct “Cognitive
Topologies” decoded by CSD. Note the structural di-
vergence between Panic Mode (Red; high Fear/Uncer-
tainty) and Frenzy Mode (Blue; high Greed/FOMO).
This confirms CSD’s capability to disentangle com-
plex market sentiments into interpretable mathemati-
cal vectors.
3.2.2 Quantification Mechanism: Constrained
Prompt-based Probabilistic Projection
Harnessingthe implicit statistical representation of
natural language patterns encoded by LLMs, this
studyreframeslatent syntactic and semantic struc-
tures into a tool for measuring probabilistic distri-
butions via prompt engineering.Within this pro-
cess, the systemimposestargeted constraintsthat
compel the model to project unstructured text onto
the 17 orthogonal cognitive dimensions.Generating
corresponding confidence scores, this mechanismen-
ablesthe high-precision decoupling and quantification
of latent cognitive states embedded within human lan-
guage.(See Appendix B.1 for the complete constrained
prompt pseudocode.)
Drawing on empirical findings, this study sub-
stantiates that purely descriptive natural language
prompts—which lack structured cognitive con-
straints—exhibit significant "semantic drift" across
divergent models and temporal frames. Mathematical
operators (e.g., L(n)) are introduced not to prioritize
mechanical precision, but to act as high-dimensional
cognitive anchors that lock the structural skeleton of
text generation in latent space, thereby ensuring high
cross-model consistency.
3.2.3 Macro-Aggregation & Dynamic Predic-
tion
To account forthe non-linear dynamics inherent in
market behavior, the CSDextendsits functionality
by constructing a multi-level cognitive processing flow:
5
•Macro State Assessment (Node 2): Consol-
idatingdaily micro cognitive vectors into a macro
state vector (V state ={MDI, MCF I, Meta}),
this nodecalculatesthe Market Dispersion Index
(MDI) to quantify sentiment divergence and the
Market Consensus Frenzy Index (MCFI) to mea-
sure irrational exuberance.These metricsserve
as the foundational basis for identifying market
regime shifts.
•Context-Adaptive Prediction (Node 3):
Drawing onthe macro quadrant probabili-
ties output by Node 2, the frameworkem-
ploysa hybrid-precision GJR-GARCH architec-
ture.Within this paradigm, the modeles-
chewsfixed parameters,insteaddynamically
modulating volatility transmission coefficients (α,
β) in real-time response to the current market
state (e.g., “Structural Tearing”).This adaptive
modulationfacilitates the capture of non-linear
risk signalsthattypically elude standard static
models.
3.3 Dual-layer Cognitive Simulation
Framework
Rooted ina fundamental redefinition of the gener-
ation objective, the CTE (Cognitive Text Encoder)
shiftsits optimization focus away from textual fluency
towardthesystematicreproductionofhumancognitive
imperfections.Designedto circumvent the statistical
smoothinginherenttoautoregressivemodels, thestudy
advancesa dual-layer cognitive architecture:
•Macro Layer: Aligned withSimon’s Satisfic-
ing paradigm, this layerinternalizes“Cognitive
Priors” to simulate the “Bounded Search” process
characteristic of human decision-making.Con-
strained byknowledge boundaries and perspec-
tival limits, this mechanismforestallsthe conver-
gence of generated content toward the statistical
mean,therebypreserving the specificity of indi-
vidual viewpoints.
•Micro Layer: Corresponding toBaddeley’s
working memory construct and Kahneman’s noise
hypothesis, this layerdeploysCognitive Per-
turbation Operators.Includingfunctions such
as the “Sentence Length Oscillation Operator”
and the “Probability Perturbation Operator,” this
layerinjectssystematic irrational fluctuations at
the lexical and syntactic levels.Furthermore,
a “Logical Fault Tolerance Mechanism” permits
micro-level logical leaps,reproducingthe insta-
bility of biological neural networks [10].
At the level ofunderlying operational mecha-
nisms, thedual-layerarchitectureofthePMCSFrepli-
catesthe core mechanism of human creativity: con-
ceptual integration [23].Whereasadvanced human
creation entails the decoupling and recombination of
discrete cognitive elements to generate novel synthe-
ses, standard AI tends to smooth these heterogeneous
elements.By orthogonally separatingtop-level
macro anchoring from bottom-level micro perturba-
tion, the PMCSFenablesthe systematic recombina-
tion of these elements,fosteringthe emergence of cog-
nitive tension.
3.4 Core Principles of the Framework:
Anti-Data Leakage and Causal
Simulation
Rigorous adherence tothe Anti-Data Leakage Prin-
ciple governs the design of the PMCSF.During con-
struction, the systemstrips awayall specific histor-
ical facts and objective market summariesthatcould
induce bias,retainingonly universal commentary in-
formation.Combiningthis stripped-down dataset
with relevant mathematical theories, the systemes-
tablishescognitive dynamics rules.These princi-
plesensure the framework operates as a general cog-
nitive dynamics simulatorrather thanan overfitted
repository of historical data.
4 Experimental Design and Data
4.1 Philosophy of Experimental De-
sign: From Statistical Fitting to
Causal Prototype Verification
Rigorously validating the efficacy of the PMCSF
framework, this study constructs a progressive two-
stage verification system. While accounting for finan-
cial market non-stationarity—a challenge highlighted
by Harvey [19]’s warnings about “p-value manipula-
tion” and López de Prado [20]’s framework for the
“non-stationarity dilemma”—the experimental design
abandons the traditional quantitative research ap-
proach of “large-sample statistical fitting” in favor of
a prototype verification strategy prioritizing “causal-
ity over correlation.” This shift reflects a deliberate
rejection of correlation-driven inference, which risks
conflating spurious patterns with actionable insights
in dynamic systems.
4.1.1 Sample Selection Under Non-
Stationarity Constraints
Training on mixed-period data, as both scholars cau-
tion, appears prone to introducing structural noise
that obfuscates causal relationships. Accordingly, this
study eschews full historical data in favor of a “Pro-
totype Verification” principle, selecting “Scenario An-
chors” from A-share market history—specifically the
2015 stock market crash and the 2024 bull mar-
ket—which exhibit the highest signal-to-noise ratios
and most pronounced irrational characteristics as ex-
perimental samples. Employing high-precision sample
validation, this approach aims to confirm the model’s
6
robustness and logical self-consistency under extreme
market conditions, where cognitive biases and informa-
tion asymmetry are most acute.
4.1.2 Phased Verification Process
Guided by the foregoing principles, the verification
process is partitioned into two stages, each designed to
isolate distinct dimensions of the PMCSF framework’s
performance:
Phase One: Verification of Cognitive Codec
Mechanisms
It aims to substantiate the objectivity of PMCSF
as a universal cognitive protocol—an assertion con-
tingent on its ability to encode and decode hu-
man language consistently across contexts. To this
end, a three-dimensional testing framework, which
includes double-blind testing (to eliminate observer
bias), Jensen–Shannon divergence (to quantify distri-
butional similarity), and cross-model testing (to as-
sess generalizability), is constructed to comprehen-
sively validate the operational efficacy of the dual-
engine architecture (CSD/CTE).
Phase Two: Functional Gain Verification
Under live simulated stress testing in the A-share mar-
ket—a setup mimicking the constraints of real-world
trading—the phase assesses whether CTE-generated
data effectively complements the long-tail cognitive
signals filtered out by standard AI. These signals,
which include rare heuristic biases and emotional fluc-
tuations, are critical to capturing the “cognitive tex-
ture” of human decision-making. The goal is to deter-
mine whether such data can yield substantial strate-
gic improvement, particularly in environments where
statistical optimality (e.g., mode collapse) undermines
predictive accuracy.
4.2 Phase I: Verification of the Cogni-
tive Codec Mechanism
Tasked with validating the foundational mechanisms
of the PMCSF framework, this stage aims to compre-
hensively substantiate that the system not only gen-
erates text imbued with human-like cognitive texture
but also captures objective cognitive invariants—core
constructs posited to underpin authentic human lan-
guage.
4.2.1 Principle Verification: Double-Blind
Ecological Test and Algorithmic Feed-
back
In pursuit of ecological validity, in-situ tests were con-
ducted over a one-month period (August–September
2025) within two authoritative Chinese internet con-
tent distribution environments. Guided by academic
ethics and privacy protections, the platforms are
anonymized:
Platform A (Expert Human Review Environ-
ment)
•Characteristics:One of China’s most influential
top-tier technology and business media platforms,
which maintains stringent entry barriers (average
external submission acceptance rate<10%over
the past three years) and requires all external sub-
missions to undergo atriple-review processby
senior editors (with>5years of experience).
•Experimental Design:A double-blind design
was employed, wherein submissions fromD CTE
(generated by this framework) andDHuman (au-
thoredbyhumanexperts)weremixedandsubmit-
ted over one month. Review editors, completely
unaware of the experiment, selected and published
articles based on their professional experience.
•Evaluation Metric:Submission acceptance
rate, a metric that serves as the highest standard
of human expert aesthetic judgment.
Platform B (Algorithm-Human Hybrid Recom-
mendation Environment)
•Characteristics:A comprehensive news and in-
formation portal boasting a stable monthly active
user (MAU) base exceeding 200 million.
•Distribution Mechanism:The portal employs
a hybrid distribution model combining deep learn-
ing recommendation algorithms and human inter-
vention, where content first undergoes algorithmic
initialqualityscreeningtoenterabasictrafficpool
before receiving traffic weighting based on user in-
teraction metrics (e.g., click-through rate [CTR],
read completion rate).
•Evaluation Metric:Average views per article,
a measure that reflects objective feedback on con-
tent quality from an industrial-grade recommen-
dation algorithm.
4.2.2 Statistical Fingerprint Verification: JS
Divergence Metrics
In an effort to eliminate subjective evaluation bias,
computational linguistics metrics were introduced
to objectively verify whether CTE-generated text
(DCTE ) exhibits a statistical distribution closer to
real human text (DHuman) than does standard AI-
generated text (DStandard).
•Design:
– Sample Construction:To ensure com-
parability, three parallel corpora were con-
structed for the same market period (e.g., the
2015 stock market crash), including (1) Real
human comments (DHuman, N= 100); (2)
CTE-generated text (DCTE , N= 100); (3)
Standard AI-generated text (DStandard, N=
100).
7
– Metric Selection:Drawing on Biber’s
multi-dimensional analysis framework [7],
key statistical features—including sentence
length standard deviation and adjective den-
sity—were selected as linguistic fingerprints,
with commas used to denote categorical
boundaries.
•Evaluation:Jensen-Shannon (JS) Divergence, a
measure of distributional similarity, was used to
quantify the distance between the probability dis-
tributions of each generated group and the human
benchmark (DHuman).
•Inference:IfJS(D CTE ||DHuman)≪
JS(D Standard||DHuman), the data lends cre-
dence to the claim that the CTE successfully
breaks the statistical smoothing of standard AI
and replicates the cognitive texture of human
language at a structural level.
•Note:D Standard was generated using the ad-
vanced “Immersive Market Participant Simulator”
protocol (see Appendix H), which enforces spe-
cific persona constraints (e.g., “bagholder,” “hot
money”) and expression rules to minimize AI-
typical neutrality, representing a rigorous baseline
for state-of-the-art prompt engineering.
4.2.3 Biological Volatility Verification
Seeking to transcend the constraints of subjective Tur-
ing tests and probe the latent mechanisms govern-
ing model-generated text, this study adopts a micro-
statistical lens—conducting normality tests and dis-
persion analyses on the sentence-length distributions
of synthetic outputs. Central to this section is the
objective of employing quantitative methodologies to
rigorously validate the empirical validity of the “Sen-
tence LengthOscillation OperatorLs(n)” atthe micro-
statistical scale.
•Design:
– Sample Construction:
∗ControlGroup(Standard-AI):Aco-
hort of 155 sentences (N= 155) was
extracted from output generated by an
industry-recognized high-quality model
(Standard-AI).Declaration:This sam-
ple underwent independent assessment
by a senior editorial team affiliated with
a leading authoritative Chinese financial
media outlet—an evaluation that sub-
stantiated compliance with publishing
standards for grammatical accuracy, log-
ical coherence, and terminological pre-
cision, with the text deemed “indistin-
guishable from the work of a human se-
nior commentator.” This rigorous en-
dorsement ensures the study avoids com-
parison with suboptimal models, instead
targetingtheindustrial“state-of-the-art”
in text generation.
∗Experimental Groups (CTE
Groups):Drawn from a text pool
generated through double-blind testing,
three representative texts—randomly
selected to represent divergent sce-
narios—were designated as CTE-A
(Emotional Catharsis Mode), CTE-B
(In-depth Analysis Mode), and CTE-C
(Macro-Chaotic Mode).
∗SampleConstructionStrategy:Em-
ploying a sentence-level granularity anal-
ysis strategy, this study conducts com-
parisons across four representative text
scenarios while deriving statistical power
from the micro-units within these texts.
The total sample comprises 461 sen-
tences (Standard Group: 155; CTE
Groups: 113/90/103 respectively), a
dataset that surpasses the statistical
threshold required for robust distribu-
tion analysis and Shapiro-Wilk normal-
ity tests (N>30). The observed Zipfian
long-tail distribution and high variance
emerge as structurally significant fea-
tures with statistical robustness, a con-
clusion supported by the dataset’s ad-
herence to the thresholds for normality
and distributional integrity.
– Data Processing:Full texts from both the
Standard-AI and CTE groups were parsed,
with segmentation into granular units per-
formed using standard Chinese sentence-
ending punctuation (period, question mark,
exclamation mark); subsequent analyses
quantified character length for each sentence
and total sentence count.
– Metric Selection:To capture central ten-
dency, the Mean (µ) was selected; for rel-
ative dispersion—dubbed “breathing sensa-
tion”—the Coefficient of Variation (CV) was
employed. Distribution shape, particularly
long-tail characteristics, was assessed via
Skewness, while normality was evaluated us-
ing the Shapiro-Wilk Test.
•Evaluation:The distribution of Standard-AI
outputs (N= 155) served as the benchmark, with
its probability density function computed to as-
sess conformity to normality (p >0.05) and coeffi-
cient of variation. A distribution meeting the nor-
mality assumption while displaying low dispersion
was classified as having succumbed to the “Trap
of Statistical Smoothness.” Statistical character-
istics of the CTE groups were then compared to
this benchmark. Should the CTE data exhibit sig-
nificantly elevated CV, right skewness (indicating
long-tail distributions), and a rejection of normal-
8
ity(p <0.05), suchoutcomeswouldbeinterpreted
as successful activation of biological volatility.
•Inference:If experimental results reveal
Standard-AI outputs converging to a normal
distribution, whereas CTE groups display non-
normal, high-volatility characteristics with statis-
tically significant differences, the data would lend
credence to the hypothesis that the CTE effec-
tively disrupts the “statistical smoothness” inher-
ent to standard AI—replicating, at the structural
level, the “quasi-periodic chaos” andCognitive
Texturethat define authentic human language.
4.2.4 Verification of Cognitive Structure Ob-
jectivity
Objective:To verify whether the proposed 17-
dimensional cognitive state vector space—a con-
struct designed to represent human cognitive pro-
cesses—possesses objective scientific validity indepen-
dent of model architecture.
Logic:Positing that a subjectively defined vector
spacewouldproducerandomdeviationsinquantitative
data across models, the study argues that high struc-
tural convergence among heterogeneous models (with
different architectures, e.g., DeepSeek V3 vs. Doubao
1.6) within this framework would confirm the capture
of objective cognitive topology and cognitive invariants
inherent in human language.
Design:Atestsetcontaining 26key timenodes was
constructed, and the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient
(ICC) for hierarchical sentiment indices between the
two models was calculated to quantify their consensus
on the cognitive structure.
4.3 Phase II: Functional Gain Verifica-
tion (A-Share Market Hypothesis)
Building upon the morphological fidelity verification,
this phase deploys the PMCSF framework within the
A-share market ecosystem, aiming to evaluate the
signal completeness efficacy of CTE data in com-
plex financial systems via a quantitative backtesting
paradigm. The experimental hypothesis posits that
Cognitive-Enhanced Data—by injecting irrational cog-
nitive factors—can refine a model’s analytical prowess
regarding market microstructure, a claim rooted in the
premise that human-like “imperfections” strengthen
rather than obscure decision-making signals.
To mitigate theoretical backtesting biases, the study
incorporates stringent constraints congruent with live
trading standards:
•Transaction Friction:A total cost of 0.26% per
trade—encompassing bilateral commissions and
impactslippage—wasestablishedtoreplicatereal-
world execution costs.
•Risk Benchmark:An annualized risk-free rate
of 2% (daily 0.008%) was designated for Sharpe
Ratio calculation, aligning with industry-standard
risk metrics.
•Evaluation System:Primary focus was directed
toward Maximum Drawdown and the Sharpe Ra-
tio (beyond cumulative returns) to assess strategy
robustness under extreme risk conditions.
4.3.1 CSD Interpretability Verification: Four-
Stage High-Fidelity Protocol
Toaddressthemethodologicalchallengeofinconsistent
time granularity in the prototype sample, the study
adopted a four-stage hierarchical verification protocol:
1.Stage 1 (Quantitative Macro Signals):For
a sample ofN= 16“event days,” the Pearson
correlation between the CSD sentiment index and
the objective index’s daily price change was tested
to validate directional alignment.
2.Stage 2 (Qualitative Narrative Verifica-
tion):Across the full sample ofN= 27, a frame-
by-frame comparison was conducted between the
core narrative extracted by the CSD and the se-
mantic matching degree with objective event de-
scriptions, ensuring narrative coherence.
3.Stage 3 (Causal Mechanism Verification):
Key prototypes were spot-checked to compare
whether the cognitive biases and causal chains di-
agnosed by the CSD aligned with objective de-
scriptions of market behavior.
4.Stage 4 (Core Feature Verification):The
CSD’s most distinct function—investor stratifica-
tion—was verified to determine if its results quan-
titatively replicated real historical complex diver-
gences (e.g., “retail investor bear market vs. fund
investor bull market”), a test of cross-temporal
consistency.
4.3.2 Dynamic Prediction Superiority Verifi-
cation: M-Dynamic vs. M-Static
Objective:To ascertain whether the CSD-based
“context-adaptive” model (M-Dynamic) outperforms a
static benchmark with fixed parameters (M-Static), a
comparison designed to isolate the value of real-time
cognitive adaptation.
Design:Comparative tests were conducted during
two independent out-of-sample (OOS) periods—April
2025 and November 2025—to avoid overfitting to a sin-
gle market regime.
•Experimental Group (M-Dynamic):Em-
ployed the full context-adaptive model, leverag-
ing CSD-derived signals to adjust parameters in
response to market flux.
•Control Group (M-Static):Deployed a static
benchmark model with parameters fixed to av-
erage values across all quadrants, simulating a
“frozen” decision-making framework.
9
•Evaluation Dimensions:Encompassed both
the mechanistic layer (signal response speed, in-
formation entropy) and the practical layer (Safety
Buffer, Sharpe Ratio) to capture trade-offs be-
tween theoretical rigor and real-world utility.
4.3.3 Empowerment Value Verification: The
“Trace Element” Effect of CTE Data
AimingtoverifythecorevalueofCTEdataasa“cogni-
tive enhancer,” the experiment constructs three com-
parison groups to test the effectiveness (Information
Coefficient, IC) of the sentiment factor during two ex-
treme cycles: the 2015 stock market crash (N= 23)
and the 2024 bull market (N= 13):
•Model A (Cognitive-Enhanced):Incorpo-
rated 20% CTE data, blending human and syn-
thetic signals to simulate the “noise trader” dy-
namics described in the DSSW Model.
•Model B (Pure Human):Relied on 100% pure
human data, serving as a baseline for assessing
signal dilution risks.
•Model C (Standard AI):Integrated 20% stan-
dard AI data, a control to measure the impact
of statistically optimized (but cognitively flat) in-
puts.
Note: Drawing on the DSSW Model (De Long et al.)
from behavioral finance, the 20% blending ratio was
chosen to mimic the mechanism whereby a minority
of irrational traders dominate peripheral pricing. This
design mirrors the bi-domain integration in conceptual
blending theory [23], seeking to enhance the model’s
generalized understanding of non-stationary financial
signals by injecting heterogeneous Cognitive Texture.
Inference:IfIC A > IC B > IC C, the data
would lend credence to the claim that CTE data not
only avoids diluting the human signal but—through
the complementation of irrational cognitive fea-
tures—enhances the model’s capability to capture ex-
treme market conditions, a finding with direct impli-
cations for risk management.
4.3.4 Isomorphic Stress Testing Based on
Real-World Simulation
To validate that CTE data effectively captures long-
tail cognitive signals overlooked by standard data, the
study designed a rigorous isomorphic ablation experi-
ment—one that holds all variables constant except for
the presence of cognitive decision triggers:
•Experimental Logic and Variable Control:
The base strategy was uniformly set as the
M-Dynamic framework with GARCH parameter
adaptability, designating the intervention state of
the “Conditional Trigger Logic” as the sole con-
trolled variable.
•Experimental Group (20% CTE Data):In-
troduced an explicit threshold mechanism based
on the CTE cognitive state vector (e.g., setting
fear >0.3as a mandatory stop-loss point), a
setup intended to simulate a trading execution
process with clear cognitive decisiveness.
•Control Group (100% Human Data):Re-
moved the cognitive threshold trigger module, re-
lying solely on statistical mean reversion logic to
simulate a passive adaptation state devoid of a
clear action trigger.
Verification Goal:The experiment seeks to deter-
mine whether the high signal-to-noise ratio informa-
tion from CTE data can convert a potential informa-
tion perception advantage into precise timing capabil-
ity and strategic gains at key market inflection points
(e.g., trend reversals, structural breakdowns) during
non-linear market conditions like the 2015 crash and
2024 bull market.
5 Experimental Results
Systematically presenting empirical data from the
PMCSF framework across two dimensions—cognitive
encoding/decoding mechanisms (per the “Cognitive
Codec” definition) and functional gain—this chapter
demonstrates that the framework not only approxi-
mates the statistical fingerprints of human cognitive
texture (the “imperfections” inherent in authentic hu-
man language) but also yields significant asymmetric
strategic advantages in high-frequency feedback finan-
cial systems.
5.1 Phase I: Verification Results of the
Cognitive Codec Mechanism
This phase validates the fundamental operational ca-
pabilities of the dual-engine architecture comprising
the CTE (Cognitive Text Encoder) and CSD (Cogni-
tive State Decoder)—the core engines of the PMCSF
framework.
5.1.1 Industrial-Grade Turing Test: Sensory
Indistinguishability
Employing a double-blind experimental design, this
study confirmed that the PMCSF framework generates
long-form text indistinguishable from human-written
content at a sensory level—findings that lend pre-
liminary validation to the Simulating Cognitive Non-
Optimality principle.
Expert Review Pass Rate (Platform A)Over a
one-month period, during which reviewing editors re-
mained blind to content provenance, CTE-generated
submissions achieved a72.7%expert review pass
rate—significantly outperforming the13.1%rate of
the human control group (p <0.01). Given that this
10
platform typically rejects over 80% of human submis-
sions, the results suggest that cognitively perturbed
text—defined as writing bearing the “imperfections”
of cognitive load and emotional fluctuation—did not
merely meet but exceeded the baseline level of human
experts in logical density and professional insight.
Algorithmic Recommendation Feedback (Plat-
form B)Under controlled conditions ensuring topic
consistency, CTE-generateddataoutperformedthehu-
man group, with the average read count per CTE-
generated article (11,089) significantly exceeding that
of the human group (7,314). This outcome is at-
tributed to the cognitive non-optimality simulated by
the CTE—including emotional fluctuations, heuristic
biases, hesitation, logical leaps, and controlled text
rhythm—which effectively triggered positive feedback
mechanisms in the recommendation algorithm. The
content was judged to possess higher user retention
value, resulting in greater traffic weighting.
5.1.2 Morphological Fidelity: Statistical Fin-
gerprint Verification Based on JS Diver-
gence
Seeking to mitigate subjective bias, this study employs
computational linguistic metrics—rooted in Biber’s
[7] multidimensional analysis framework—and deploys
Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence to quantify the dis-
tributional distance betweenD CTE (CTE-generated
data) andD Human (human data) across five key sta-
tistical dimensions. As delineated in Table 1, CTE-
generated data exhibit a pronounced statistical over-
lap with human data when evaluated against stylistic
fingerprint metrics.
•Key Finding:For the standard deviation
of sentence length, the Jensen-Shannon diver-
gence betweenD CTE andD Human registers at a
mere0.0614, while the corresponding value for
standard AI-generated data (DStandard) reaches
0.4431.
•Theoretical Interpretation:This marked (>
7-fold) discrepancy lends credence to the efficacy
of cognitive perturbation operators. Consider, for
example, the sentence length oscillation operator
Ls(n): it reliably disrupts the statistical smooth-
ing (i.e., Statistical Mode Collapse) characteristic
of standard large language models, thereby repli-
cating the cognitive “breathing” pattern inherent
to human linguistic production.
5.1.3 The Statistical Smoothness Trap and Bi-
ological Fluctuation
Adopting a micro-statistical lens, this study conducts
normality tests and dispersion analyses on the sentence
length distributions of generated text, with visualiza-
tions presented in Figure 3.
Table 1: Comparison of JS Divergence in Statistical
Style Fingerprints
Metric CTE vs Human
(Std-AI vs Human) Key Insight
Sentence Length SD0.0614
0.4431CTE approximates human (>7x
diff).
Adjective Density0.0526
0.6094CTE approximates human (>11x
diff).
Noun-Verb Ratio0.1197
0.2882CTE is significantly closer to hu-
man.
Interjection Count0.0003
0.0101CTE is significantly closer to hu-
man.
Avg Sentence
Length
0.0935
0.5054CTE approximates human (>5x
diff).
Note: Top row is CTE data; Bottom row (italic) is Std-AI data.
The Trap of Statistical SmoothnessAs depicted
in Figure 3, the sentence length distribution of Stan-
dard AI (Group 1) manifests an unnatural “perfect
symmetry.”
•Data Characteristics:Its data, clustering
tightly around a mean of 23.65 characters, ex-
hibits a Coefficient of Variation (CV) of 43.96%
and a skewness value of 0.328—both approaching
the benchmarks of perfect symmetry.
•Normality Test:Results from the Shapiro-Wilk
test yield a p-value of 0.053 (>0.05), suggest-
ing the distribution barely adheres to normality
in statistical terms.
•Inference:This finding lends credence to the
existence of a “Statistical Smoothness Trap” in
current industrial-grade LLMs trained via greedy
decoding strategies. While Platform A’s expert
panel lauded these outputs as “deceptively real”
for their “moderate and regular” character, this
“extreme removal” mathematically signals a ma-
chine origin, lacking the randomness and chaos
intrinsic to authentic human expression.
Reproduction of Biological FluctuationIn con-
trast, CTE models enhanced by the PMCSF frame-
work—group CTE-A serving as an illustrative exam-
ple—demonstrate distinctly human biological charac-
teristics.
•Data Characteristics:They exhibit a signifi-
cantlyright-skeweddistribution(skewness=1.176)
11
Figure3: TheSpectrumofCognitiveRhythm: StatisticalSmoothnessvs. BiologicalFluctuation. (A)Distribution:
Standard AI (blue) remains confined to a symmetric normal distribution, while CTE models (red/green/purple)
demonstrate human-like right-skewness and Zipfian tails. (B) Variability: Box plots reveal the rigid stability of
Standard AI (CV≈44%) alongside the high dynamic range and outliers of CTE models (CV≈65%), thereby
verifying the Sentence Length Oscillation Operator. (C) Fingerprints: The radar chart contrasts the static nature
of Standard AI (centered) with the dynamic, context-dependent signatures of CTE models (expanded).
and high dispersion (CV=58.69%), with the coex-
istence of very short (4 characters) and long (60
characters) sentences.
•Normality Test:The Shapiro-Wilk test yields a
p-value of1.27×10 −8 (p≪0.01), firmly rejecting
the null hypothesis of normality.
•Inference:This dispersion and skewness do not
represent algorithmic errors but rather physical
evidence of the successful activation of the Sen-
tence Length Oscillation Operator. The result
suggests the model has escaped probability con-
vergence, simulating the long-tail cognitive fea-
tures of humans operating under stressful envi-
ronments.
Conclusion:The “fluency” perceived by human in-
tuition, mathematically, reflects machine mediocrity,
while non-normal, highly variable data imperfections
encode the true cognitive texture of human cognition.
5.1.4 Cross-Model Robustness: Cognitive In-
variants
To verify whether the PMCSF framework captures ob-
jective cognitive laws—stable across models and con-
texts—independent of architectural constraints, this
study conducted comparative tests using DeepSeek-
V3.1andDoubao-1.6. Theexperimentcovered26criti-
cal market nodes (2015–2025), including stock crashes,
circuit breakers, and bull market initiations (see Ap-
pendix D).
Experimental Results
•Exceptionally High Inter-Rater Reliability:
Statistical analysis revealed an intraclass corre-
lation coefficient (ICC) of0.926for the “Novice
Sentiment Index” and0.902for the “Veteran Sen-
timent Index” between the two models. Per Cic-
chetti’s (1994) standards, this denotes “excellent”
consistency—far exceeding the threshold for ac-
tionable insights.
•Cognitive Pattern “Micro>Macro”:Con-
sistency in stratified profiles—Novice/Veteran,
ICC >0.9—was significantly higher than that of
the macro-weighted index (ICC= 0.772). This
finding suggests the necessity of the CSD ar-
chitecture: while macro-level sentiment is often
noisy and ambiguous, decoupling chaotic senti-
ment into independent cognitive personas via the
CSD enables the model to extract cognitive in-
variants—stablecognitivestructures—withhigher
signal-to-noiseratiosandgreaterobjectiveconsen-
sus.
12
ConclusionThe robust consistency observed across
a decade-long historical cycle confirms that the 17-
dimensional cognitive state vector space—termed Cog-
nitive Inter-lingua—is not an overfitted parameter spe-
cifictoanymodelbutrathersuccessfullycaptures Cog-
nitive Invariants, which are objective, stable cognitive
structures.
Figure 4: Cross-Model Consistency Heatmap. Pear-
son correlation coefficients between DeepSeek (DS)
and Doubao (DB) across 26 archetypal scenarios
reveal high correlations in Novice (0.93) and Vet-
eran (0.90) alignment—confirming robust detection of
“Frenzy” (MCFI) and “Prudence” signals, respectively.
The strong diagonal structure verifies that the 17-
dimensional cognitive topology—the structural rela-
tionships of cognitive states within the latent semantic
space—is model-agnostic, meaning it remains stable
across different AI models.
5.2 Phase II: Functional Gain and Fi-
nancial Empirical Validation
Designed to validate the practical efficacy of the PM-
CSF framework within complex financial ecosystems,
this phase seeks to bridge theoretical construct and
real-world applicability by testing the framework’s per-
formance under dynamic market constraints—an en-
deavor critical to addressing concerns about synthetic
data’s utility in high-stakes environments.
5.2.1 CSD Interpretive Power Validation Re-
sults
Key Finding:To assess the CSD’s capacity to de-
code macro market narratives, the study constructed
a key event set spanning A-share market history
(2015–2025), which encompassed critical bull-bear
transition points, major policy release dates, and black
swan events. A dataset intentionally curated to test
thedecoder’sabilitytocapturehigh-impact, non-linear
market dynamics, it yielded a striking result: across all
27 samples, the semantic alignment between the CSD-
extracted narrative_dynamics (core narrative) and ac-
tual historical records achieved a perfect 100%. This
fidelity, the study argues, reflects the CSD’s ability to
reverse-engineer unstructured text into structured cog-
nitive states—a process central to the framework’s the-
oretical underpinnings.
Table 2: Partial Matching Between Real Historical
Events and CSD Core Narratives
No. Event Description & CSD Narrative Match
4Event:Stock market crash-style plunge...
CSD:Leverage liquidations, liquidity crisis
✓
7Event:First-day triggering of circuit breakers
CSD:Circuit breaker mechanism, panic selling
✓
14Event:Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
CSD:Pandemic opening panic, stampede
✓
21Event:Unwinding of institutional crowding...
CSD:“Crowding” sentiment, fund frenzy
✓
24Event:Policy-driven comprehensive surge
CSD:“Strong Nation Bull”, “9.24” rally
✓
CoreFunctionalAlignment:Complexreal-world
divergences, such as the dichotomy of “bear market for
retail investors vs. bull market for fund investors,” can
be characterized as “institutional crowding unwinding,
retail investors buying at highs”—a nuance that chal-
lenges simplistic readings of market direction. The
CSD output quantitatively replicated this scenario,
with the Novice Index reaching+0.4(indicative of
FOMO-driven behavior) and the Veteran Index declin-
ing to−0.5(reflecting risk aversion). This quantitative
divergence, the study posits, serves as a key leading
indicator for predicting market reversals—an insight
supported by detailed analyses in Appendix G.2.
5.2.2 Robustness Test of the Dynamic Adap-
tive Mechanism Architecture
To corroborate the effectiveness of the M-Dynamic
framework as a test vehicle, the study compared its
performance against a static benchmark model (M-
Static), a design choice intended to isolate the impact
of dynamic parameters on signal processing. Signal dy-
namics analysis delineated that the introduction of dy-
namic parameters significantly optimized signal qual-
ity, with Signal Response Latency decreasing from 0.83
days to 0.33 days and Information Entropy declining
from 1.072 to 0.765. These changes, the data suggests,
indicate a higher signal-to-noise ratio at the signal pro-
cessing level—an improvement that directly enhances
the framework’s predictive capacity.
Transaction friction sensitivity analysis demon-
stratedthatinfull-samplesimulations, theM-Dynamic
modelachievedan8.6%DefensiveAlpha(thesafety
buffer accumulated by avoiding crashes), a figure sig-
nificantly higher than the static benchmark’s 0.198%.
This result, the study argues, confirms the dynamic
architecture’s robustness against high transaction fric-
tion and establishes a structural foundation for vali-
dating CTE data efficacy.
13
5.2.3 Empowerment Value (I): Micro-Signal
Completion
Employing cross-cycle A/B/C controlled experiments,
the study confirmed that CTE data effectively com-
pletes long-tail cognitive signals and enhances model
robustness—findings that address concerns about syn-
theticdata’sabilitytocapturenuancedmarketdynam-
ics.
•Result:In the 2015 bear market, Model A (aug-
mentedwith20%CTEdata)achieved an Informa-
tionCoefficient(IC)of0.761, avaluesignificantly
superior to both the pure human data baseline
(0.757) and standard AI-generated data (-0.121).
This performance disparity, the analysis suggests,
stems from CTE data’s ability to retain cognitive
texture lost in standard synthetic outputs.
•Inference:Standard AI data, exhibiting a neg-
ative correlation (-0.121) under extreme market
conditions, revealed dynamic fragility—a limita-
tion attributed to its excessive pursuit of statis-
tical smoothing. This fragility, the study notes,
leads to cognitive dissonance in non-linear mar-
kets, where panic-driven sell-offs are misinter-
preted as normal fluctuations. In contrast, CTE
data successfully completes the “irrational panic”
signals filtered out by standard AI, demonstrating
efficacy in micro-signal completion.
In summary, the strategic gain from incorporating
20% CTE synthetic data appears to stem not from
mere real-data coverage, but from encoding genuine
marketpsychologybyincreasingthegranularityofcog-
nitive states. This, the study posits, is a critical ad-
vantage in markets where cognitive texture drives price
movements.
5.2.4 Empowerment Value (II): Practical
Gains Based on Isomorphic Stress Test-
ing
To address this question, the study employed Isomor-
phic Stress Testing, a framework where, holding the
M-Dynamic (dynamic adaptive) strategy logic con-
stant, simulated trading performance was compared
between the CTE-Enhanced (cognitive enhancement
group) and Human-Baseline (human baseline group)
using distinct input data streams. This design, the re-
searchers argue, ensures that any performance differ-
ences can be attributed to the data rather than strat-
egy variation. To ensure external validity, the testing
process enforced a 0.26% transaction friction cost (in-
cluding bilateral commissions and impact slippage).
Bear Market Survival Test (2015 Stock Disas-
ter): Bear Market Stop-Loss
•Maximum Drawdown Analysis:Analysis of
maximum drawdown revealed that the CTE-
Enhanced group’s maximum drawdown stood at
12.2%, a figure47.4%lower than the Human-
Baselinegroup’s23.2%. Thisriskcontrolimprove-
ment, the study posits, stems from CTE data’s
ability to complete “irrational panic” signals di-
luted in standard data—signals that enabled the
model to identify a market sentiment phase tran-
sition just before the June 29th crash. This trig-
gered a critical stop-loss, containing losses in the
bear market.
•Defensive Alpha & Safety Buffer:Backtest
data delineates that the CTE-Enhanced group
generated8.6% Defensive Alpha(excess re-
turnsfromavoidingthecrash)relativetothebase-
line. This alpha, the analysis suggests, equates to
a Safety Buffer of33 timesthe actual transac-
tion cost (0.26%) per trade—an indicator that the
strategy captures strong cognitive signals rather
than weak statistical noise. Even under extreme
slippage or liquidity drought, its survival advan-
tage remains robust.
Bull Market Breakout Test (2024 Rally): Bull
Market Chase
•Net Return Performance:Examination of net
returns revealed a surge in performance for the
CTE-Enhanced group, which achieved a net re-
turn of+17.92%,2.2 timesthat of the Human-
Baseline group’s +8.04%. This outperformance,
the study argues, stems from the CTE-Enhanced
group’s ability to simulate extreme FOMO sen-
timent—a factor that prompted the strategy to
capture the main upward wave and avoid missing
out.
•Risk-Adjusted Return:Analysis of risk-
adjusted returns revealed that the CTE-Enhanced
group’s Sharpe Ratio (0.248) far exceeded the
baseline’s (0.008), lending credence to the propo-
sition that “cognitively enhanced signals” greatly
optimize profit efficiency in bull markets. This
improvement, the researchers note, reflects the
framework’s ability to balance risk and return
more effectively than pure human data.
Conclusion:Within non-linear financial systems,
empirical data suggests that synthetic data simulating
human bounded rationality effectively compensates for
the cognitive biases and signal lags inherent in pure hu-
man data during dynamic market conditions. It serves
as a tool for high-dimensional encoding and comple-
tion of the market’s microstructure—filling gaps left
by both pure human and standard synthetic outputs.
Implicit in this finding is the recognition that cognitive
texture, often filtered out by statistical optimality, is
essential for modeling the complexity of real-world fi-
nancial behavior.
14
Figure 5: Bear Market Survival Test (2015 Crash Scenario). Top Panel: NAV comparison. M-Dynamic (Red)
triggers a stop-loss on June 29 via micro-signal completion, generating significant “Defensive Alpha” (Red Zone)
against the M-Static baseline (Grey). Bottom Panel: Drawdown profile. CTE intervention improves Maximum
Drawdown from -23.2% to -12.2% (47.4% relative optimization), demonstrating robustness in extreme conditions.
6 Discussion
6.1 Theoretical Contribution: Redefin-
ing “Effective Synthetic Data”
Within the domain of synthetic data research, the “sta-
tistical smoothing assumption” has persisted as a foun-
dational principle for decades. The theoretical contri-
bution of this study resides in rejecting the pursuit of
statisticaloptimality, forginganovelparadigmwherein
Cognitive Fidelityemerges as the core dimension for
evaluating synthetic data.
Constructing the PMCSF framework, this study has
operationalized a bidirectional mapping mechanism
between natural language and cognitive states. The
CSD,whichservesasthedecodingendpoint, mapsnat-
ural language into a shared 17-dimensional cognitive
state vector via dimensionality reduction; the CTE,
functioning as the encoding endpoint, subsequently re-
constructs text infused with biological noise (e.g., neu-
ral rhythm fluctuations) using this vector. Its essence
resides in the extraction and replication of the under-
lyingCognitive Invariantsthat characterize human
cognition.
Furthermore, this study delineated that the CSD ex-
hibits a “zero-shot cognitive probing” property. As de-
tailed in the CSD’s prompt design(see Appendix B.1),
no rigid predefined scoring rules were imposed (e.g.,
assigning a -1 score to market crashes); instead, the
framework relies entirely on the LLM’s implicit under-
standingofthe17-dimensionalvectorspace—grounded
in Ekman and Russell’s theories [21, 22]—to achieve
a high degree of cross-model consensus. Cross-model
experiments (ICC >0.9) have substantiated that
the 17 emotion dimensions are not isolated labels but
an interlockingCognitive Topology. Arising from
their shared learning of the objectively existing “affec-
tive geometry” in human language during pre-training,
scores converge across different models: they can rec-
ognize universally prevalent psychological activities in
humans, such as the inevitable decrease in Agency and
increase in Uncertainty that accompany a rise in Fear.
In this process, the CSD acts as a “cognitive probe”
that renders the implicit, nonlinear semantic structure
explicitly computable as a mathematical vector.
Among the unexpected findings of this study is the
divergence that emerges between subjective evaluation
and statistical authenticity. Reviewing evaluations
from authoritative media institutions, this study notes
that human expert-based assessment criteria—which
prioritize grammatical perfection over the cognitive
texture of authentic expression—exhibit a smoothing
15
bias. Introducing biological noise via cognitive per-
turbation operators, the proposed PMCSF framework
undermines traditional anthropomorphism standards,
reframing the metric from "looks like human" to "com-
putes like human" in its generation paradigm.
In summary, emotion and irrationality are not incal-
culable noise but representable information with high-
dimensional geometric attributes—attributes that
standard synthetic data frameworks, fixated on sta-
tistical optimality, have historically overlooked.
6.2 Implications for AI Development:
From “Probability Statistics” to
“Cognitive Dynamics”
LLMs have long been criticized for merely perform-
ing “Next Token Prediction” based on statistical rules
(i.e., “guessing probabilities” rather than “understand-
ing emotions”). The success of the CSD, however,
demonstrates that by introducing an “intermediate
cognitive layer” (the 17-dimensional vector) consistent
with psychological axioms, we can compel AI to tran-
scend superficial statistical probabilities and access the
underlying causal logic of human thought.
Giventheconstraintsofhumanlanguagecorpussize,
samples of extreme emotions (e.g., panic during a stock
market crash) are often sparse and discontinuous, re-
sembling low-frame-rate footage. This mechanism is
isomorphic in principle toFrame Generationtech-
nology in computer graphics: standard AI training ex-
hibits a tendency to compute a linear average of these
discrete points, resulting incognitive frame skip-
pingover nonlinear mutations. The CTE, by contrast,
uses the 17-dimensional vector as a “motion vector”
for thought to generate “intermediate state” text—text
that logically must exist between real data points but
is missing from the corpus. It is the presence of this
high-frame-rate cognitive data that lends the model ro-
bustness under extreme conditions (e.g., withstanding
33 times the transaction costs).
Current AI research, including DeepMind’s Chain of
Thought (CoT) and LeCun’s world model, is primar-
ily oriented toward approximating the objective truth
of the physical world by eliminating errors. By con-
trast, the PMCSF framework proposed in this study
is focused on replicating the subjective reality of the
human mind by simulating imperfections. These two
approaches are not mutually exclusive; rather, they
represent two essential paths for artificial intelligence
toward high Intelligence Quotient (IQ) and high Emo-
tional Quotient (EQ), respectively. The former targets
the“what” ofobjectivereality, whilethelattercaptures
the “how” of human cognition—a distinction that may
redefine the boundaries of synthetic data utility and
AI adaptability in real-world contexts.
6.3 Application Prospects: From
Quantitative Finance to Virtual
Societies
In quantitative finance, the Market Dispersion In-
dex (MDI) and Market Consensus Frenzy Index
(MCFI)—tools furnished by the CSD—serve as novel
alpha factors for capturing structural micro-shifts in
marketsentiment. Concurrenttothis, thehigh-fidelity,
highly stable synthetic data produced by the CTE en-
ables robust stress testing and strategy backtesting un-
der extreme market conditions, serving as a safe simu-
lation sandbox for evaluating algorithmic resilience.
For public opinion and brand management, the
framework facilitates real-time quantification of the
public’s complex, contradictory emotions towards
events or brands, transcending simplistic positive/neg-
ative sentiment analysis to provide early warnings of
potential public opinion crises. This nuanced ap-
proach, which moves beyond binary classification, of-
fersactionableinsightsformitigatingreputationalrisk.
Validating the framework’s generalization potential,
its applicability extends beyond finance; in a trans-
fer experiment involving movie review generation, the
Jensen-Shannon divergence between CTE-generated
text and human text decreased significantly from 0.24
to 0.11 relative to standard AI-generated text. This
finding lends credence to the proposition that “sim-
ulating bounded rationality” constitutes a fundamen-
tal, universal principle for enhancing the authenticity
of synthetic data—one that transcends domain-specific
constraints.
6.4 Limitations and Future Work
WhilethisstudydemonstratesthepotentialofthePM-
CSF framework in enhancing synthetic data quality,
several salient limitations persist.
•Stability of Generation Mechanism:To en-
sure cognitive dynamism, the CTE module incor-
porates stochastic perturbation operators, giving
rise to minor, low-probability micro-fluctuations
in the generated details across different batches
for the same prompt, despite the macro cognitive
vectorbeingdeterministicandinterpretable. Con-
sistent with the cognitive characteristic of high-
quality human output (“clear in overall direction
with improvisational details”), future work should
explore the introduction of more deterministic
chaos dynamics equations tailored to specific ap-
plicationscenarios—anadjustmentthatcouldbal-
ance dynamism with reproducibility.
•Empirical Scope Constraints:The current
empirical validation is limited to the A-share mar-
ket; given structural differences in markets such
as US equities (which lack price limits) and cryp-
tocurrencies (which trade 24/7), the transmis-
sion mechanisms of cognitive signals (alpha, beta)
16
may plausibly drift, requiring cross-market ro-
bustness tests. Such tests would help disentangle
whether the framework’s performance is contin-
gent on market-specific institutions or generaliz-
able to global contexts.
•Modality Constraints:Finally, this study fo-
cuses primarily on cognitive simulation in the tex-
tual modality, leaving multi-modal cognitive syn-
ergy (e.g., vocal tone, facial expressions) underex-
plored. Future research could extend the cogni-
tive dynamics model to multi-modal data genera-
tion, investigating the mapping relations of biases
and emotions across modalities to provide empiri-
calsupportforbuildingmorehuman-likecognitive
agents. This expansion would address a critical
gap in current generative AI, which often treats
modalities in isolation.
6.5 Ethics and Safety
The PMCSF framework proposed in this study, while
innovative, constitutes a double-edged sword. The
high-fidelity text generated by the CTE module, which
possesses strong anti-AI-detection capabilities, could,
if misused, facilitate large-scale disinformation cam-
paigns—an risk exacerbated by the framework’s ability
to mimic human cognitive texture. Furthermore, as a
paradigm that requires no model fine-tuning, the PM-
CSF framework has a relatively low barrier to repli-
cation; malicious actors could exploit its market sen-
timent analysis and prediction capabilities for market
manipulationortogainunfairtradingadvantages, pos-
ing threats to financial security.
In light of these risks and out of consideration for
AI safety and responsible release, this paper has cho-
sen not to disclose the full original prompt text for the
CTE module. However, detailed algorithmic pseudo-
code and architectural logic are provided inAppendix
B; these materials are sufficient to support academic
replication and verification while minimizing the risk
of malicious misuse. We call upon the academic com-
munity to establish stricter access controls and ethi-
cal review mechanisms when developing such powerful
generative tools—measures that are essential for pre-
venting abuse while preserving the framework’s scien-
tific value.
7 Conclusion
7.1 Research Summary: From Statisti-
cal Imitation to Cognitive Simula-
tion
Originating from an imminent crisis wherein the dwin-
dling availability of high-quality human data and the
reliance on statistically optimal synthetic data lead
to the homogenization and collapse of AI models,
this study proposes and validates thePrompt-driven
Cognitive Computing Framework (PMCSF).
The framework’s innovation resides in a paradigm
shift: moving away from the statistical imitation of
data appearances and toward the deep simulation of
the underlying cognitive mechanisms that generate hu-
man expression. Consequently, it constructs a dual-
engine system of inverse operations—theCognitive
StateDecoder(CSD)andtheCognitiveTextEn-
coder (CTE)—a pair of components that achieve a
computable representation and reconfigurable genera-
tion of human irrational thinking.
Delineating the definitive manifestation of anthro-
pomorphism in artificial systems, this study advances
the proposition that such a construct is not character-
ized by omniscience or omnipotence but by inherent
limitation and imperfection. Serving both as a techni-
cal antidote to model collapse and a potential ethical
cornerstone for the development of Trustworthy AI,
this framing rests on a simple yet profound insight:
AI capable of erring and fluctuating—of embodying
the cognitive "noise" of human thought—closely ap-
proximates genuine human cognition, thereby foster-
ing comprehensibility and relatability. The logic here
is dual: by simulating the "imperfections" of bounded
rationality, we not only mitigate the degenerative cy-
cles of synthetic data but also build systems that hu-
mans can intuitively engage with—a prerequisite for
long-term trust.
7.2 Review of Core Findings
A two-stage system validation, entitled “Cognitive De-
coding - Functional Verification,” yielded the following
key conclusions:
•Cognitive Codec Fidelity:Empirical evidence
substantiates that the dual-engine architecture of
PMCSF successfully achieves the reversible rep-
resentation and reconstruction of human cogni-
tion. Based on cognitive vectors extracted by the
CSD (decoding) and perturbed reconstruction by
the CTE (encoding), the generated text closely
approximates human text in its statistical finger-
print (JS Divergence =0.0614). Turing test re-
sults lend credence to the claim that, aided by
the closed-loop “decode-reconstruct” mechanism,
the framework demonstrates significantly supe-
rior performance compared to standard AI models
in passing human expert review and algorithmic
quality alignment.
•Functional Gain:Within the high signal-to-
noise ratio environment of the A-share market,
the dynamic adaptive strategy incorporating CTE
data demonstrated significant asymmetric advan-
tages. Notably during the 2015 stock market
crash, this strategy reduced the maximum draw-
down by47.4%and generated8.6%Defensive
Alpha (excess loss control), a metric equivalent
to furnishing the strategy with a Safety Buffer
17
33 timesgreater than the actual transaction cost
(0.26%). Mechanism analysis revealed that micro-
level parameter adjustments—introduced by the
CTE (such as the asymmetric shock coefficient
α−)—were recursively amplified through the non-
linear dynamics mechanism of the GARCH model,
thereby translating into macro-level strategic sur-
vivaladvantagesatcriticalmarketjunctures. This
further corroborates the hypothesis that “hybrid
CTE data outperforms pure human data,” indi-
cating that Cognitive-Enhanced Synthetic Data
effectively compensates for the long-tail cognitive
signals missing in standard models.
7.3 Theoretical Implications: The Ob-
jectivity and Decoding of Semantic
Topology
Across models with divergent parameters and architec-
tures, theCognitive Topologyconstructed within
the latent semantic space exhibits a trend toward iso-
morphism. In this study, the CSD did not presuppose
hard-coded rule mappings, instead relying entirely on
the model’s implicit understanding of text. Experi-
mental results suggest that LLMs are not merely per-
forming “probabilistic fill-in-the-blank”; through pre-
training on massive corpora, they have learned the
complex, nonlinear geometric relationships between
human emotions and logic—including the strong cou-
pling between fear and uncertainty. From this perspec-
tive, LLMs have already “understood” human think-
ing, an understanding encapsulated within unreadable
high-dimensional vectors. The CSD engine within the
PMCSF framework essentially constructs a“semantic
projection protocol,”decoding the model’s inter-
nal, implicit, high-dimensional machine cognition into
an explicit 17-dimensional human cognitive coordinate
system. It appears plausible that emotion and irra-
tionality are not incalculable random noise but math-
ematical entities with rigorous geometric structures.
7.4 Concluding Remarks
In the face of future AI data scarcity, humanity’s an-
swer should not be endless extraction but profound
creation. Through simulating the "imperfections" of
human thinking, the PMCSF framework demonstrates
that AI can be endowed with greater authenticity and
robustness. It not only provides a viable technical path
to address Model Collapse but also opens new avenues
for understanding the deep isomorphic relationship be-
tween human and machine intelligence. We anticipate
that future research will build upon this foundation
to further explore the path of cognitive evolution in
human-AI symbiosis.
Declaration
Utilizing large language models (LLMs) during both
methodological implementation and manuscript refine-
ment, this study operates within a framework of aca-
demic ethics and transparency, prompting the follow-
ing statement:
As Research Subject and Experimental
Tool
The proposed PMCSF framework’s core compo-
nents—theCognitive State Decoder (CSD)
andCognitive Text Encoder (CTE)—are built
upon LLMs, their functionality integrated into the
study’s experimental design to simulate cognitive
non-optimality. During experimentation, API calls
were deployed to models including DeepSeek V3.1,
Doubao 1.6, Gemini 2.5 PRO, and Gemini 3.0
PRO—facilitating tasks such as cognitive state decod-
ing, text generation, data annotation, and prototype
engineering implementation. The use of these models
constitutes an essential part of the study’s methodol-
ogy, described technically in the main text and appen-
dices to ensure reproducibility.
As Writing Assistance Tool
The authors deployed AI tools to aid in language
polishing, translation proofreading, figure and table
preparation, code snippet formatting, and product
demonstration production, leveraging algorithmic ef-
ficiency to streamline administrative tasks while pre-
serving human oversight.
Human Author Responsibility
Core to this research—conceptualization, experimental
design, analytical logic, and final conclusions—were in-
dependently completed by the human authors, whose
expertise in finance and interdisciplinary research
guided the study’s direction. The authors assume full
responsibility for the accuracy of all presented data,
viewpoints, and citations, with AI-assisted outputs
serving as a complement rather than a substitute for
human judgment. All AI-generated text, images, and
code underwent rigorous human review and verifica-
tion to eliminate errors and ensure alignment with the
study’s objectives.
The study’s completion was enabled by a novel re-
search paradigm characterized by “human expert–AI
collaboration.” As a domain expert with over a decade
of experience in finance, the author conducted this
complex interdisciplinary research—spanning cogni-
tive science, computational linguistics, and quantita-
tive finance—precisely through in-depth collaboration
with AI, which augmented rather than replaced human
ingenuity.
18
References
[1] Villalobos, P., Sevilla, J., Heim, L., Besiroglu, T.,
Hobbhahn, M., & Ho, A. (2022). Will we run
out of data? An analysis of the limits of scal-
ing datasets in Machine Learning.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.13438.https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2210.13438
[2] NewsGuard. (2024). The Rise of ‘Pink Slime’
Journalism: 1,265 U.S. Fake Local News Sites and
the Foreign Networks Behind Many of Them. Re-
trieved fromhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Pink-slime_journalism
[3] Shumailov, I., Shumaylov, Z., Zhao, Y., Gal, Y.,
Papernot, N., & Anderson, R. (2023). The Curse
of Recursion: Training on Generated Data Makes
Models Forget.arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17493.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.17493
[4] Simon, H. A. (1956). Rational choice and
the structure of the environment.Psychological
Review, 63(2), 129–138.https://doi.org/10.
1037/h0042769
[5] Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment
under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases.Sci-
ence, 185(4157), 1124–1131.https://doi.org/
10.1126/science.185.4157.1124
[6] Chomsky, N.(1965).Aspects of the Theory of Syn-
tax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.https://doi.
org/10.21236/AD0616323
[7] Biber, D. (1988).Variation across Speech and
Writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511621024
[8] Baddeley, A. D., & Hitch, G. (1974). Work-
ing memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.),The psy-
chology of learning and motivation(Vol. 8, pp.
47–89). Academic Press.https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0079-7421(08)60452-1
[9] Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during prob-
lem solving: Effects on learning.Cognitive
Science, 12(2), 257–285.https://doi.org/10.
1207/s15516709cog1202_4
[10] Buzsáki, G. (2006).Rhythms of the Brain.
Oxford University Press.https://doi.org/10.
1093/acprof:oso/9780195301069.001.0001
[11] Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect
Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk.
Econometrica, 47(2), 263–291.https://doi.
org/10.2307/1914185
[12] Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Ad-
vances in prospect theory: Cumulative represen-
tation of uncertainty.Journal of Risk and Un-
certainty, 5(4), 297–323.https://doi.org/10.
1007/BF00122574
[13] Simon, H. A. (1947).Administrative Behav-
ior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes
in Administrative Organization. New York:
Macmillan.https://psycnet.apa.org/record/
1948-00884-000
[14] Bragdon, C., et al. (2023). Human heuristics for
AI-generated language are flawed.Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.2208839120
[15] Mitra, T., et al. (2025). Distinguish-
ing AI-Generated and Human-Written
Text Through Psycholinguistic Anal-
ysis.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.01800.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01800
[16] Park, J. S., O’Brien, J. C., Jiang, C. J.,
et al. (2023). Generative Agents: Interactive
Simulacra of Human Behavior.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.03442.https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2304.03442
[17] Argyle, L. P., Busby, E. C., Fulda, N., et al.
(2023). Out of one, many: Using language mod-
els to simulate human samples.Political Analysis,
31(3), 337-351.https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.
2023.2
[18] Alemohammad, S., Cascadella, G., Zani, M., et
al. (2023). Self-Consuming Generative Models Go
MAD.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01850.https:
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.01850
[19] Harvey, C. R., Liu, Y., & Zhu, H. (2016). ...and
the cross-section of expected returns.The Review
of Financial Studies, 29(1), 5-68.https://doi.
org/10.1093/rfs/hhv059
[20] López de Prado, M. (2018).Advances in Financial
Machine Learning. John Wiley & Sons.https:
//doi.org/10.1002/9781119482100
[21] Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emo-
tions.Cognition & Emotion, 6(3-4), 169-200.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02699939208411068
[22] Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of
affect.Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 39(6), 1161–1178.https://doi.org/10.
1037/h0077714
[23] Fauconnier, G., & Turner, M. (2002).The Way
We Think: Conceptual Blending and the Mind’s
Hidden Complexities. New York: Basic Books.
[24] Gigerenzer, G., & Gaissmaier, W. (2011). Heuris-
tic decision making.Annual Review of Psychol-
ogy, 62, 451-482.https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-psych-120709-145346
19
Table 3: Glossary of Terms: Bridging Technical Definitions and Intuitive Explanations
Term Technical Definition Intuitive Explanation
PMCSF Prompt-driven Cognitive Computing
Framework.The overarching framework
advanced in this study, serving as a “cogni-
tive simulator” for interpreting market sen-
timent.
A framework that acts like a
“flight simulator” for financial emo-
tions, generating market commen-
taries that sound human.
CSD Cognitive State Decoder.The “mind-
reading” engine of PMCSF, decoding un-
structured text into a structured 17-
dimensional cognitive state vector.
A “cognitive dimensionality re-
ducer” that turns messy human
words into a precise mathematical
coordinate.
CTE Cognitive Text Encoder.The “writing”
engine of PMCSF, re-encoding vectors into
text via a dual-layer architecture to inject
“cognitive noise” for authentic texture.
A generator that adds “human im-
perfections” (like hesitation or ex-
citement) back into the text to
make it feel real.
MDI Market Dispersion Index.Quantifies
sentiment divergence between “Novice” and
“Veteran” investors; higher values indicate
instability.
The “Disagreement Index”: when
pros and amateurs fiercely disagree,
the market is likely about to break.
MCFI MarketConsensusFrenzyIndex.Mea-
sures the intensity of consensus around pos-
itive sentiment (e.g., Joy, Anticipation).
The “Fever Thermometer”: mea-
sures how irrationally euphoric the
market crowd has become.
GARCH Generalized Autoregressive Condi-
tional Heteroskedasticity.A classical
econometric model for forecasting volatility,
enhanced here with sentiment parameters.
A standard risk-prediction math
formula, but we upgraded it to un-
derstand human emotions.
Novice Novice Investor.Retail investors char-
acterized by herd behavior, emotional
decision-making, and frequent use of excla-
mation marks.
The “Amateur”: chases highs, cuts
lows, and gets easily excited or pan-
icked.
Veteran Veteran Investor.Seasoned investors/s-
mart money marked by caution, contrarian-
ism, and risk-awareness.
The “Pro”: calm, cynical, and often
bets against the crowd.
Cognitive TextureIrregularities in language resulting from
cognitive load and heuristic biases (e.g.,
hesitation, redundancy) often filtered out
by AI.
The “Human Touch”: the small
flaws and quirks that make text feel
authentic rather than robotic.
Cognitive TopologyThe structural arrangement of cognitive
states within latent space, posited to be iso-
morphic across different AI models.
A “Universal Map of Thought”: im-
plies that Fear and Uncertainty are
always neighbors, no matter which
AI you ask.
Cognitive CodecA mechanism positing that human cogni-
tion and language can be reversibly mapped
(encoded/decoded) between semantic and
vector spaces.
A “Compression Tool for Thought”:
like MP3 for audio, it compresses
thoughts into vectors and plays
them back as text.
Defensive AlphaExcess return generated by avoiding losses
during market downturns (e.g., via early
stop-losses triggered by CTE data).
“Losing less is winning”: if the mar-
ket crashes 20% and you only lose
10%, that10%savedisyourvictory.
Cognitive Manifold InterpolationComputationally generating smooth, log-
ically consistent cognitive states between
discontinuous real data points.
“Frame Interpolation for Thought”:
like filling in the missing frames in a
video to make jumpy thoughts look
smooth.
Conceptual BlendingA mechanism combining elements from
multiple mental spaces (e.g., grand nar-
rative + narrative texture) to form novel
ideas.
“Cocktail Mixing for Ideas”: blend-
ing deep logic with rich storytelling
to create something new.
Zero-shot ProbingEvaluating AI’s understanding without ex-
plicit training, using natural language
prompts to elicit inherent knowledge.
“Lie Detection”: checking if the AI
truly understands a concept natu-
rally, without being spoon-fed the
answer.20
Appendix A: Mathematical Definitions of Cognitive Perturbation
Operators
Elaborating on the core mathematical operators employed within the PMCSF framework to simulate the cognitive
hallmarks of human bounded rationality, this appendix establishes the foundational components of the CTE’s
micro-layer.
A.1 Sentence Length Oscillation Operator
Definition:Simulates the “charge-discharge” rhythm of human cognitive load, e.g., variations in sentence length
arising from mental fatigue or fluctuating focus.
Mathematical Formulation:
Ls(n) =⌊L+A·sin(ωn+ϕ) +ϵ⌋(4)
Wherein:
•L s(n): Target word count for then-th sentence.
•L: Baseline sentence length, typically ranging from 15 to 20 words.
•A: Oscillation amplitude governing variations between long, complex sentences and short, concise ones.
•ω: Cognitive breathing frequency, analogous to respiratory cycles, which models the “compactness” of thought.
•ϵ∼N(0, σ 2): Random Gaussian noise that captures the non-mechanical, stochastic character of biological
cognition.
A.2 Probability Perturbation Operator
Definition:Simulates non-optimal word selection stemming from emotional interference (e.g., fear, excitement)
or cognitive hesitation.
Mathematical Formulation:
P′(wt |w <t)∝P(w t |w <t)1/τ ·M bias(wt)(5)
Wherein:
•P(w t |w <t): Original prediction probability generated by a large language model (LLM) for the next word
wt, given the preceding contextw<t.
•τ: Dynamic temperature coefficient, adjusted in response to the current cognitive state (e.g., higher values
for “excited” states, lower for “anxious” states).
•M bias: Bias mask that elevates the probability of words aligned with current cognitive priors (e.g., risk-averse
vocabulary for “fear” states) while suppressing statistically generic terms.
A.3 Semantic Leap Operator
Definition:Simulates the non-linear, associative nature of human thought processes, such as digressions or sudden
topic shifts.
Execution Logic:
Upon detecting a paragraph transition or thought shift, the first content wordwnext of the subsequent sentence
must satisfy:
cos(E(wnext), Cprev)< θleap (6)
WhereinE(w next)denotes the embedding ofw next,C prev represents the context vector of the previous sentence,
andθ leap (e.g., 0.5) serves as a predefined semantic similarity threshold. This ensures a controlled “digression”
while preserving coherence.
21
Appendix B: Cognitive Text Encoder (CTE) Generation Protocol
(Pseudocode)
Note: In light of considerations related to AI safety and responsible release (see Section 6.5 of the main text), this
appendix furnishes solely the algorithmic logic pseudocode for the CTE module—omitting the complete original
prompt text to mitigate unintended replication risks.
B.1 System Initialization
# Define cognitive physics parameters(Cognitive Physics Parameters): foundational variables
governing the simulation of human cognitive constraints
Physics_Params = {
" associative_leap_prob ": 0.6 ,# Probability of associative leaps(Cognitive
Perturbation Operator): simulates heuristic - driven semantic jumps
" pattern_skepticism ": 0.7 ,# Pattern skepticism factor(Cognitive
Invariant): quantifies resistance to overfitting statistical modes
" logical_tolerance ": 0.5 ,# Logical tolerance threshold(Cognitive Physics
Parameter): bounds for acceptable " human " logical imperfection
" rhythmic_volatility ": 0.8# Rhythmic volatility index(Cognitive Perturbation
Operator): models breathing / cognitive load effects on sentence structure
}
# Define writing operators(Cognitive Perturbation Operator
Roles): modular agents governing generative style and constraint
Operators = {
" Architect ": {" role ": " Logic Builder ", " volatility ": " Low "},# Enforces
structured reasoning(Cognitive
Topology): aligns with hierarchical cognitive state relationships
" Narrator ": {" role ": " Storyteller ", " volatility ": " Medium "},# Balances
coherence and variation(Cognitive
Texture): preserves authentic human " imperfections "
" Punchline ": {" role ": " Impact Maker ", " volatility ": " High "}# Introduces
heuristic - driven " surprises "(Heuristics and
Biases): mimics recency / loss aversion biases
}
B.2 Phase I: Internal Thought Construction
function Phase_I_Construct ( Cognitive_Prior_Text ):
# 1. Macro extraction : Internalize the logical skeleton of thecognitive prior
text(a bounded search space for satisficing , per * Cognitive Priors *)
Structure_DNA = Extract_Logic_Skeleton ( Cognitive_Prior_Text )# Captures
hierarchical reasoning(Cognitive
Topology): isomorphic across advanced AI models
World_View = Extract_Core_Stance ( Cognitive_Prior_Text )# Encodes core beliefs
(Cognitive
Invariants): stable across models / contexts
# 2. Fusion planning : Assign operators based on structural type to avoidStatistical
Mode Collapse
Fusion_Plan = []
for section in Structure_DNA :
if section . type == " Analysis ":
# Prioritize logical rigor for analytical sections (e.g., financial
modeling )
Fusion_Plan . append ({" content ": section , " operator ": Operators [" Architect "
]})
elif section . type == " Narrative ":
# Balance flow and variation for storytelling (e.g., investor sentiment
narratives )
Fusion_Plan . append ({" content ": section , " operator ": Operators [" Narrator " ]})
elif section . type == " Conclusion ":
# Inject heuristic - driven impact to avoid homogenized endings
Fusion_Plan . append ({" content ": section , " operator ": Operators [" Punchline "
]})
22
return Fusion_Plan
B.3 Phase II: Micro-Execution & Perturbation
function Phase_II_Generate ( Fusion_Plan , Physics_Params ):
Final_Text = ""
for step in Fusion_Plan :
# 1. Base generation : Produce initial text via operator - specific style (e.g., "
Logic Builder " for analysis )
Raw_Content = LLM_Generate ( step . content , style = step . operator [" role "])# Uses
role - guided constraints to bound generative search
# 2. Inject cognitive perturbations : Apply biological / psychological " noise "
(Cognitive Perturbation
Operators)
# Simulate rhythmic variation (e.g., breathing / cognitive load ) via sentence
length oscillation
Perturbed_Content = Apply_Sentence_Oscillation ( Raw_Content , Physics_Params ["
rhythmic_volatility "])
# Simulate associative leaps ( heuristic - driven semantic jumps ) if probability
threshold is met
if random () < Physics_Params [" associative_leap_prob "]:
Perturbed_Content = Apply_Semantic_Leap ( Perturbed_Content )
# 3. Logical tolerance check : Prevent over - optimization(Statistical Mode Collapse)
if not Check_Logic ( Perturbed_Content , tolerance = Physics_Params ["
logical_tolerance "]):
# Forcibly inject " human flaws " (e.g., hesitation , logical leaps ) to
preserveCognitive
Texture
Perturbed_Content = Inject_Human_Flaw ( Perturbed_Content )
Final_Text += Perturbed_Content
return Final_Text
Appendix C: Core Parameter Calibration Report
Ensuring the scientific rigor and reproducibility of the Cognitive State Decoder (CSD) module within the Prompt-
driven Cognitive Computing Framework (PMCSF), all key dynamic parameters were derived through rigorous
empirical calibration. This appendix delineates the calibration methodology, data inventory, and statistical test
results underpinning this process—critical for validating the framework’s utility in computational cognitive science
and behavioral finance.
C.1 Calibration Methodology & Data Inventory
Employing a hybrid calibration strategy that merges empirical case studies with theoretical calibration, the study
operationalized three core components to balance data-driven precision and theoretical coherence:
•GARCH Baseline Parameters:A hybrid calibration method was deployed, whereby GJR-GARCH(1,1)
was directly estimated via Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) for data-rich typical quadrants (e.g., the
2015 stock market crash), while behavioral finance theories (e.g., loss aversion coefficients) guided expert
calibration for data-sparse quadrants.
•Satellite Model Coefficients:A two-step regression approach was applied, beginning with OLS regression
(incorporating interaction terms) on global data to validate moderating effects, followed by the computation
of local effective coefficients for each quadrant.
23
•Impulse Response Parameters:A synthesis of key case averaging (for empirical grounding) and Prospect
Theory priors (for theoretical consistency) was employed to model transient sentiment dynamics.
In pursuit of robustness—a foundational requirement for reproducible research—a calibration dataset spanning
diverse market cycles was constructed (see Table 4). The dataset includes extreme volatility events (e.g., the 2015
stock crash), structural regime shifts (e.g., the 2021 “structural tear” period), and macroeconomic shocks (e.g.,
regulatory emergencies), ensuring coverage of both common and rare market conditions.
Table 4: Data Inventory for Calibration
Calibration Task Time Window Sample Description Validn
GARCH Anchoring 2015-06-12–2015-08-26 Stock Market Crash (High Volatility) 52
GARCH Validation 2021-01-04–2021-02-26 Structural Tear Period 36
Shock Threshold (MDI) 2015/2016/2018 Pre-Crisis Eves (T−1) 3
Shock Vector (∆E) 2015/2020 Regulatory Event (T= 0) 3
Holiday Effect 2020–2024 Post-Holiday vs. Regular Trading Days 46
C.2 GJR-GARCH Parameter Calibration for Core Dimensions
Table 5 presents the estimated GJR-GARCH parameters for the Fear dimension across distinct market quad-
rants—parameters that were not only calibrated for typical quadrants (e.g., Full Bubble or Structural Tear) but
also interpolated and theoretically derived for all six quadrants to enable all-weather market simulation. This
approach ensures the framework can model both common and extreme sentiment states, a critical feature for
avoiding the “statistical mode collapse” discussed in the main text.
Table 5: GJR-GARCH Parameter Calibration Results for Fear Dimension (Full Version)
Macro-Quadrant Dominant Emotionω α α − βCalibration Basis
A. Full Bubble Greed 0.03 0.05 0.15 0.88 2021 Beta + Expert Setting
B. Structural Tear Joy 0.01 0.10 0.08 0.80 2021 Fitting (ω, α −, β)
C. Dead Ice Fear 0.02 0.05 0.00 0.85 2018 Fitting→GARCH(1,1)
D. Inert Recession Sadness 0.04 0.03 0.10 0.92 2015 Beta + Expert Setting
E. Recessional Tear Fear 0.05 0.02 0.20 0.90 2015 Anchor (Expert Calib.)
F. Structural Rally Joy 0.01 0.12 0.07 0.78 2021 Fitting (ω, α, α −, β)
Statistical Insight:In bearish quadrants—notably Recessional Tear (E) and Dead Ice (C)—the asymmetric
shock coefficientα − exceeds the symmetric coefficientαat a statistically significant level (p <0.01), mathe-
matically lending credence to the asymmetric dynamic wherein panic propagates more rapidly than recovery in
bear markets. This finding aligns with behavioral finance theories positing amplified loss aversion during market
downturns, a heuristic explicitly modeled in the PMCSF framework.
C.3 Calibration of Satellite Sentiment Dynamics Coefficients
To validate the moderating effect of macro-state—operationalized via the Market Consensus Frenzy Index
(MCFI)—on micro-sentiment transmission, a global interaction regression method was employed. The model
specification is as follows:
Y=c 1X+c 2VX +c 3MCF I+c 4(X×MCFI) +ϵ(7)
whereYdenotes the outcome variable (e.g., sentiment propagation intensity),Xrepresents micro-sentiment (e.g.,
Joy),V X signifies sentiment volatility (e.g.,VJoy , aligned withVMDI for consistency), andϵcaptures unobserved
heterogeneity.
Empirical Results:Significant interaction terms (p <0.05) were observed in two critical windows—the 2015
stock market crash (n= 29) and the 2021 “grouping” period (n= 15)—where macro-state exerted a measurable
influence on sentiment dynamics. These results support the contextual adaptability hypothesis, which posits that
market states alter the leverage of sentiment transmission.
Conclusion:Interaction terms withp <0.05lend credence to the contextual adaptability hypothe-
sis—suggesting market states significantly modulate the leverage of sentiment transmission. For example, the
negative coefficient forc 4 (Joy×MCFI) in the FOMO model indicates that high MCFI (a proxy for market
consensus) dampens the positive relationship between Joy and sentiment propagation, a finding consistent with
the “curse of recursion” in AI-generated data.
24
Table 6: Parameter Adaptability Validation During the 2015 Stock Crash (n=29)
Model Coefficient Estimatep-value Sig.
FOMOc 1 (Joy) 0.8543 0.000 *
c2 (VJoy ) 0.2345 0.045 *
c3 (MCFI) 0.1234 0.321
c4 (Joy×MCFI) -0.4567 0.012 *
c5 (VJoy ×MCFI) -0.1890 0.038 *
Greedc 1 (Joy) 0.9123 0.000 *
c2 (VJoy ) 0.1987 0.067 .
c4 (Joy×MCFI) -0.5123 0.008 *
c5 (VJoy ×MCFI) -0.1567 0.052 .
∆Uncertaintyu 1 (VMDI ) 0.3456 0.023 *
u2 (MCFI) -0.2345 0.089 .
u3 (VMDI ×MCFI) 0.1890 0.041 *
Regretr 1 (Regret_Lag1) 0.7234 0.000 *
r2 (MCFI) -0.4567 0.015 *
r3 (Regret_Lag1×MCFI) 0.3456 0.028 *
Table 7: Parameter Adaptability Validation During the 2021 “Grouping” Period (n=15)
Model Coefficient Estimatep-value Sig.
FOMOc 4 (Joy×MCFI) -0.8872 0.046 *
c5 (VJoy ×MCFI) -0.4431 0.485
Greedc 4 (Joy×MCFI) -0.9161 0.038 *
c5 (VJoy ×MCFI) -0.7248 0.076 .
∆Uncertaintyu 3 (VMDI ×MCFI) 0.1205 0.768
Regretr 3 (Regret_Lag1×MCFI) 0.4168 0.027 *
Conclusion:In the 2021 structural market—a period characterized by low volatility and concentrated sectoral
gains—the significance of interaction terms diverged from the 2015 crash. However, key interactions for FOMO,
Greed, and Regret retained statistical significance (p <0.05), substantiating the methodological robustness of the
calibration framework. This consistency across distinct market regimes is critical for ensuring the CSD module’s
utility in real-world applications.
C.4 Holiday Effects and Decay Coefficient Calibration
Calibrating the emotional decay coefficientαvia log-linear regression on 46 holiday samples spanning 2020–2024,
the model adopts the specification:
ln(Et+T ) =β 0 +β 1 ln(T) +β 2 ln(Et) +ϵ(8)
Table 8: Regression Results
Emotion Nˆα=− ˆβ1 p-val (β1)R 2 Threshold
Fear 35 0.32<0.0010.85E t >0.7
Greed 10 0.25 0.001 0.93E t >0.6
Joy 10 0.20 0.002 0.90E t >0.6
Sadness 10 0.11 0.027 0.88E t >0.8
Trust 10 0.05 0.046 0.86E t >0.6
Fear (0.32) and Greed (0.25)—intense, short-term emotions—exhibit the most rapid decay, while Sadness (0.11)
and Trust (0.05)—long-term “sticky” states, with sadness arising from prolonged losses and trust requiring repeated
cultivation—demonstrate significantly slower attenuation.
25
C.4.1 Post-Holiday Volatility Effect
SampleH(Holiday)comprisesthefirsttradingdayfollowingstatutoryholidays(e.g., SpringFestival, NationalDay)
withN= 8. Sample N (Normal) includes purely regular trading days (N= 14), strictly excluding periods around
holidays and weekends to isolate the pure holiday effect. An independent Welch’s one-tailedt-test was applied to
four emotional dimensions (fear, joy, uncertainty, sadness) with the alternative hypothesis:H1 :Avg(REV H)>
Avg(REVN ).
Table 9:t-Test and Multiplier Calibration Results
Dim Avg(H) Avg(N) Ratiot-statp-val Sig? Mult.
Fear 0.200 0.105 1.905 1.78 0.042 Yes 1.91
Joy 0.180 0.085 2.118 2.05 0.025 Yes 2.12
Uncertainty 0.220 0.120 1.833 1.82 0.039 Yes 1.83
Sadness 0.160 0.095 1.684 1.55 0.063 No 1.00
The data lends credence to the hypothesis that fear, joy, and uncertainty exhibit statistically significant higher
volatility on post-holiday trading days relative to normal sessions (p <0.05). The effect for sadness, while numeri-
cally elevated, fails to meet the 0.05 significance threshold (p= 0.063)—a result attributable to its dependence on
long-term market conditions (e.g., prolonged sectoral slumps in 2021), which diminish the salience of single-day
volatility.
C.5 Shock Response Model Parameter Calibration
This section delineates key parameters within the CSD module (Cognitive State Decoder) for simulating the impact
of sudden events (the “butterfly effect”), including the model’s susceptibility to shocks and the magnitude of its
response.
1. Vulnerability Threshold (MDI Threshold):A retrospective analysis of MDI values from the day prior
(T−1) to three major A-share market crises revealed an average pre-crisis MDI of1.54±0.12, significantly higher
than the normal mean (0.65). A data-driven threshold ofMDI >1.2was established.
Table 10: EmpiricalT−1MDI Historical Data
Date Event DescriptionT−1MDI State
2015-06-26 Eve of 2015 market crash (bull-to-bear) 1.5572 High (Fragile)
2018-12-20 Eve of 2018 deleveraging valuation low 1.7706 High (Fragile)
2016-01-07 Eve of circuit breaker crisis (liquidity) 1.7007 High (Fragile)
2015-07-15 Stable normal day (Control Group A) 0.4472 Low (Stable)
2025-10-13 Stable normal day (Control Group B) 0.8370 Low (Stable)
2. Shock Vector (∆E) Calibration:Employing a key event averaging method, two typical “regulatory black
swan” events (“2015-05-28” and “2021-07-26”) were selected to compute the emotional vector increment (∆E) on
the shock day (T= 0). Calibrated values include:
•Fear-inducing events:{F ear: +0.75, Trust:−0.70}(average of pure shock effects).
•Confusion-inducing events:{Uncertainty: +0.8, Certainty:−0.8}(historically grounded benchmark).
Table 11: Fear-Inducing Shock Calibration (PureT= 0Effect)
Key Event Baseline (t−1) Shock (t)V Fear (t−1)V Fear (t) ∆F ear
“5·28” Crash 2015-05-27 2015-05-28 0.00 0.95 0.95
OTC Crackdown 2020-07-07 2020-07-08 0.35 0.90 0.55
Average 0.75
26
Table 12: Confusion-Inducing Shock Calibration (PureT= 0Effect)
Key Event Baseline (t−1) Shock (t)V Unc (t−1)V Unc (t) ∆Unc
“5·28” Crash 2015-05-27 2015-05-28 0.40 0.85 0.45
OTC Crackdown 2020-07-07 2020-07-08 0.45 0.80 0.35
Average 0.40
Table 13: Edge Case Calibration (High Baseline Uncertainty)
Key Event Baseline (t−1) Shock (t)V Unc (t−1)V Unc (t) ∆(Shock)
Everbright Fat Finger 2013-08-15 2013-08-16 0.85 (High) 1.00 (Peak) 0.15
3. Asymmetry Factorλ:Theoretical anchoring draws on Kahneman & Tversky’s Prospect Theory [11, 12],
particularly the empirical range of 1.5–2.5 for the loss aversion coefficient from their 1992 study. To replicate
the phenomenon where negative news of equal intensity induces greater volatility than positive news during bear
markets, a conservative amplification factor for negative shocks was set toλ= 1.5(within the Prospect Theory
range).
Appendix D: Cross-Model Consistency Statistical Analysis (N=26 Key
Nodes)
(Note: Comparing output consistency between DeepSeek-V3.1 and Doubao-1.6, this appendix draws on 26 market
samples—selected for their high signal-to-noise ratios spanning 2015–2025—to evaluate cross-model alignment.)
Table 14: Key Consistency Metrics
Paired Dimension Sample Size (N) Pearson (r) Sig. (p) ICC Consistency Rating
Novice 26 0.926<0.0010.926 Excellent
Veteran 26 0.902<0.0010.902 Excellent
Macro 26 0.777<0.0010.772 Good
Appendix E: Generalization Verification in Non-Financial Domains
(Note: Corresponding to Section 6.3 of the main text, this appendix validates the universality of simulated bounded
rationality by migrating the CTE module to a movie review generation task.)
To assess whether the PMCSF framework is confined to financial contexts, the CTE module was deployed in a
movie review generation task. Statistical performance of CTE-generated text (DCTE ) and standard AI-generated
text (DStandard) was compared against authentic human movie reviews (DHuman) to gauge approximation to
human linguistic patterns.
Conclusion:In a semantically distinct domain, PMCSF significantly reduced the statistical distance between
generated and human texts. The data lends credence to the assertion that bounded rationality and cognitive
noise—such as imperfections arising from cognitive load—constitute underlying universals of human expression.
This suggests strong cross-domain generalization potential for the framework, as its mechanisms appear robust to
contextual variation.
Appendix F: Data Infrastructure & Sample Examples
Note: To ensure reproducibility, this appendix discloses data construction details and intermediate data structures,
including CSD decoding outputs and macro-state assessments.
27
Table 15: Statistical Style Fingerprint Comparison in Movie Reviews (JS Divergence)
MetricD CTE vsD Hu DStd vsD Hu Improv. Interpretation
Avg. Sentence Length 0.1444 0.2430 40.6% Closer to human cognitive load patterns (e.g.,
breathing rhythm)—a hallmark of cognitive tex-
ture as defined in the study.
Adjective Density 0.0647 0.1309 50.6% More authentic emotional expression, reflecting
theheuristicbiasesinherentinhumanjudgment.
Noun-Verb Ratio 0.0771 0.2035 62.1% Aligns with natural narrative structure, avoid-
ing the statistical mode collapse characteristic
of standard LLMs.
Sentiment Volatility 0.0963 0.1652 41.7% Replicates nonlinear emotional fluctuations, a
key indicator of bounded rationality in human
communication.
F.1 Sentiment Database Construction
For the purposes of this study, an A-share market sentiment database covering 2015–2025 was constructed.
•Data Scale:Spanning approximately 1,400 trading days, the database avoids a “full-scrape” approach—opted
against due to LLM context window limitations and computational costs associated with deep inference—in
favor of a “Top-K High Signal-to-Noise Ratio Sampling” strategy.
•Sampling Criteria:For each trading day, dual-layer verification (AI and manual) was applied to retain only
50–100 core comments exhibiting subjective awareness and personal sentiment, ensuring the data captures
authentic human judgment rather than homogenized output.
•Final Sample:The raw database contained∼100,000 entries; after deduplication and spam filtering, 21,000
valid samples were deeply decoded by the CSD. This balance of scale and selectivity enables Chain-of-Thought
(CoT)-level deep analysis by LLMs while covering mainstream market sentiment.
F.2 Sample Output of CSD
Below is a structured decoding result from the CSD (Node 1) for an authentic comment, illustrating the transfor-
mation of natural language into a mathematical vector—consistent with the Cognitive Codec hypothesis.
Original Text:“今天大盘高开低走，早盘还有一波拉升，但午后持续回落...这种感觉就像逆水行舟，每划一下
都被推回原地，你已开始感到情绪疲惫。” (2025-11-03)
{
" report_metadata ": {
" model_version ": " GEQE_v2 .3 _Standardized ",
" calibration_notes ": " Adjusted for sarcasm detection ."
},
" market_sentiment_summary ": {
" overall_sentiment_index ": -0.48 ,
" dominant_emotions ": [
{" emotion ": " sadness ", " score ": 0.65} , // Dominant sadness
{" emotion ": " fear ", " score ": 0.52} // Accompanying fear
],
" cognitive_profile ": {
" agency ": 0.15 , // Extremely low agency ( sense of powerlessness )
" certainty ": 0.28
}
},
" detailed_thought_token_analysis ": [
{
" thought_token ": "( ( Emotional exhaustion )@*)",
" thought_token_type_enum ": " TOKEN_TYPE_EMO ",
" sentiment_vector ": {
" sadness ": 0.8 ,
" intensity ": 0.7 ,
28
" agency ": 0.1
},
" attribution ": {
" sadness ": "情绪疲惫(Emotional exhaustion)",
" agency ": "被推回原地(Pushed back to start)"
}
}
]
}
Listing 1: Structured Decoding Result (JSON)
F.3 Sample Output of Macro State Assessment
This example presents Node 2’s macro-state assessment for 2025-11-03, computed from a sequence of 5 daily
sentiment reports (10/28–11/03). The result includes dynamic metrics derived from time series, corresponding to
Section 3.2.3 of the main text.
{
" calculated_state_vector ": {
" mdi ": 0.1118 , // Market Dispersion Index
" mcfi ": 0.16 , // Market Consensus Frenzy Index
" metacognition_score ": 0.25
},
" dynamics_assessment ": {
" velocity_vector ": {
" v_mcfi ": 0.0337 , // MCFI change rate
" v_mdi ": -0.2083 // MDI change rate
},
" acceleration_vector ": {
" a_mcfi ": 0.014 , // MCFI acceleration
" a_mdi ": -0.1337 // MDI acceleration
}
},
" quadrant_membership_probability ": {
" A_Full Bubble ": 0.1953 , // Full bubble
" B_Structural Tearing ": 0.2285 , // Structural tearing
" C_Dead Freeze ": 0.0756 , // Dead freeze
" D_Inertial Recession ": 0.1629 , // Inertial recession
" E_Recessive Tearing ": 0.1496 , // Recessive tearing
" F_Structural Rise ": 0.1882 // Structural rise
},
" dominant_macro_quadrant_enum ": " MACRO_QUADRANT_STRUCTURAL_TEAR ",
" dominant_macro_quadrant_display ": " Structural Tearing ",
" state_interpretation ": " Exhibiting high fragmentation , the market state lacks a
dominant quadrant ; contradictory features such as ’ structural tearing ,’ ’full
bubble ,’ and ’ structural rise ’ underscore a stalemate between bullish and bearish
forces . This chaotic structure - observed following severe volatility - reflects the
complex interplay of cognitive invariants and market dynamics modeled by the
framework ".
}
Listing 2: Macro State Assessment Output
Appendix G: Supplementary Empirical Details
(Note: Omitting space-constrained experimental details from Chapters 4 and 5, this appendix furnishes raw data
across three dimensions—ecological validation, mechanistic analysis, and financial empirical verification—to un-
dergird the robustness of conclusions.)
29
G.1 Detailed Data from Double-Blind Ecological Tests
Presentingdetailedstatisticalresultsfromin-situexperimentsconductedontwoanonymizedplatforms, thissection
augments the ecological validation framework outlined in Chapter 4—expanding upon the preliminary findings
related to expert review and algorithmic recommendation dynamics.
Table 16: Detailed Expert Review Data (Platform A – Leading Tech Media)
Group Submissions Accepted Acceptance Rate Avg. Review Cycle (Days)
D-CTE (Ours) 33 24 72.7% 0.3
D-Human 84 11 13.1% 0.4
Note: D-CTE submissions were frequently prioritized as “in-depth commentaries”; this distinction stemmed from their
incisive analytical rigor and coherent logical architecture—traits that resonated with the platform’s editorial emphasis on
substantive discourse.
Table 17: Traffic Distribution in Algorithmic Recommendation (Platform B – Billion-Scale News Portal)
Group Sample Size Avg. Views Median Views Max Views Avg. Completion Rate
D-CTE 20 11,089 6,953 377,000 38%
D-Human 61 7,314 720 47,000 30%
Note: The elevated traffic for D-CTE submissions originated from robust “cognitive hooks” in generated titles and opening
paragraphs; these elements successfully triggered the recommendation algorithm’s Click-Through Rate (CTR) threshold,
enabling traffic pool escalation.
G.2 Full-Sample Narrative Alignment Verification
Providing detailed experimental data corroborating the conclusions of Section 5.2.1, this appendix delineates efforts
to validate the deep explanatory power of the CSD framework—focusing on its ability to align quantitative signals
and qualitative narratives with real-world market dynamics.
Phase I: Quantitative Macro-Signal Verification (N=16 Event Days)
Focused on quantifying correlations between the CSD Macro Sentiment Index (overall_sentiment_index) and
objective market price fluctuations, this phase substantiated the framework’s ability to capture macro-level signal
consistency.
•Sample:16 “event day” snapshot samples, selected for their proximity to historically significant market
catalysts (e.g., policy announcements, volatility spikes).
•Method:The Pearson correlation coefficient was computed to assess linear associations between the CSD
Sentiment Index and contemporaneous objective index price changes (%) for each historical event day.
•Result:A Pearson correlation coefficient ofr= 0.744(p= 9.45e −04) emerged, with thep-value falling well
below the 0.001 threshold—lending credence to a highly statistically significant positive association between
sentiment signals and market movements.
Phase II: Qualitative Narrative Verification (N=27 Full Sample)
Evaluating semantic consistency between the CSD-extracted core narrative (topic) and descriptive accounts of
objectively occurring real-world events, this phase validated the framework’s ability to capture qualitative narrative
alignment.
Result:A 100% semantic match (27/27) was observed across all samples, with CSD-generated topics mirroring
the thematic content of historical event descriptions.
30
Table 18: Quantitative Correlation Analysis Data (N=16)
Frame No. Date Actual Historical Event Actual Price Change (%) CSD Sentiment Index
2 2015-04-20 Severe Volatility -1.64 -0.45
3 2015-06-12 Historic High (Divergence) 0.87 0.30
5 2015-08-24 Second Crash (Double Dip) -8.49 -0.70
7 2016-01-04 First Day of Circuit Breaker -6.86 -0.90
8 2016-01-07 Second Day of Circuit Breaker -7.04 -0.65
13 2019-07-22 STAR Market Launch (Divergence) -1.07 -0.30
14 2020-02-03 Pandemic Market Open -7.72 -0.90
16 2020-07-06 Full-Blown Rally 5.71 0.90
17 2020-07-22 Index Reform (Divergence) 0.37 -0.25
18 2020-08-24 ChiNext Registration System (Div.) -0.16 -0.60
19 2020-09-08 Volatile Recovery 0.72 -0.10
20 2020-11-05 Broad Rally (Auto & Liquor) 1.30 0.80
24 2024-09-24 Policy-Driven Surge 4.15 0.85
25 2024-09-27 Policy-Driven Surge (Cont’d) 2.89 0.95
26 2025-04-07 Historic Plunge -7.34 -0.85
27 2025-08-18 Historic New High 0.85 0.80
Table 19: Core Narrative Semantic Matching (27/27) - Split View
No. CSD Narrative Actual Event Match
1 Market Euphoria & “Fool’s
Market”
2015-03: Accelerating
rally
✓
2 Market Top Warning2015-04-20: Severe
volatility
✓
3 Novice Euphoria & High
Leverage
2015-06-12: Historic high✓
4 Leverage Blow-ups2015-06/07: Crash-style
plunge
✓
5 Emotional Numbness2015-08-24: Second crash✓
6 Shock from Xu Xiang Ar-
rest
2015-11-01: Volatile re-
bound
✓
7 Circuit Breaker Panic2016-01-04: First day
trigger
✓
8 Reflection on Circuit
Breaker
2016-01-07: Second day
trigger
✓
9 Reflection on Snowball2017-11: Structural diver-
gence
✓
10 Sentiment Swings2018-01: Index volatility✓
11 Market Pessimism2018-10: V-shaped rever-
sal
✓
12 Sentiment Freezing Point2019-06: Volatile uptrend✓
13 Market “Fear of Heights”2019-07-22: STAR Mar-
ket
✓
No. CSD Narrative Actual Event Match
14 Pandemic Open Panic2020-02-03: Pandemic
shock
✓
15 Sentiment Freezing Point2020-03: Liquidity crisis✓
16 Bull Market Return2020-07-06: Full-blown
rally
✓
17 Index Rises, Sentiment De-
cays
2020-07-22: Structural
div.
✓
18 Sentiment Freezing Point2020-08-24: ChiNext reg.✓
19 Despair & Panic2020-09-08: Volatile re-
covery
✓
20 Market Euphoria2020-11-05: Broad rally✓
21 “Grouping” Rally2021-01/02: Grouping
collapse
✓
22 Market Panic & Worry2021-09: Power restric-
tions
✓
23 Sentiment Rock Bottom2023-01: Broad rally✓
24 “Strong Nation Bull”2024-09-24: Policy surge✓
25 Sentiment Boils Over2024-09-27: ChiNext
+10%
✓
26 Market Panic Plunge2025-04-07: Historic
plunge
✓
27 Bull Market Arrived2025-08-18: Historic high✓
Phase III & IV: Deep Mechanism Verification (Key Cases)
Exploring the CSD’s ability to capture granular cognitive and sentiment dynamics, this phase corrobo-
rated the framework’s precision in reproducing complex market narratives—focusing on stratification (segre-
gated_sentiment) and bias diagnosis (diagnosed_biases).
•Case 1: 2015-06-12 Peak (Frame 3)
The ground truth description—characterized by “volatile divergence patterns near historic highs” and “market
sentiment already showing caution”—was replicated with striking fidelity by the CSD. Its internal calibration
notes, independently annotating a “bimodal distribution detected,” further validated this alignment. Among
novice investors, the sentiment index registered +0.9 (euphoria, reflected in the narrative “selling property to
buy stocks”), while veteran traders exhibited a -0.6 reading (fear, anchored in concerns over “high leverage...
meaning disaster”).
•Case 2: Jan-Feb 2021 Grouping Collapse (Frame 21)
The ground truth—describing an “institutional grouping collapse” and a dichotomy of “bear market for stock
investors, bull market for fund investors”—was substantiated by the CSD’s output, which provided mathe-
matical rigor to this complex phenomenon. New fund investors (novices) displayed a +0.4 index (FOMO,
as captured by the narrative “new fund investors enthusiastically entering the market”), while seasoned stock
31
traders (veterans) exhibited a -0.5 score (aversion, tied to themes of “grouping loosening” and “reflection on
market tops”).
•Case 3: 2025-04-07 Historic Plunge (Frame 26)
The ground truth—documenting “market sentiment sinking into panic selling” and “limit-down stocks reaching
2902”—was aligned with the CSD’s output, which correctly identified uniform panic and diagnosed its core
driver as BIAS_LOSS_AVERSION (loss aversion). Novice investors registered a -1.0 index (panic), while
veterans exhibited a -0.6 score (fear), with loss aversion flagged as the dominant cognitive bias.
G.3 Comparative Analysis of Parameter Configurations: Dynamic Adaptation vs.
Static Benchmark
Objective:To verify whether the CSD’s “Contextual Adaptation” mechanism—labeled M-Dynamic—functions
as a market predictor that outperforms a static benchmark (M-Static) in a statistically significant manner.
Design:Conducting a comparative test across two independent, strictly out-of-sample (OOS) periods—April
2025 and November 2025—the study structured its analysis to isolate the impact of contextual adaptation.
•Experimental Group (M-Dynamic):Employed the full contextually adaptive model, enabling real-time
parameter modulation.
•Control Group (M-Static):Utilized a static benchmark model, whose parameters were “frozen” to average
values across all quadrants, serving as a baseline for comparison.
Table 20: Comparison of Dynamic vs. Static Model Parameter Settings: The 2015 Market Crash
Parameter M-Static (Static Bench-
mark)
M-Dynamic (Dynamic
Adaptation)
Impact Analysis
GARCH Parameter Fixed to historical mean (e.g.,
αfear− ≡0.122)
Switches based on quadrant
(e.g., Bear Marketα fear− →
0.18)
Static underestimated panic;
Dynamic delineated risk early.
CTE Trigger Fixed threshold (e.g., Stop-
loss if Fear>0.3)
Dynamic threshold (e.g., de-
creases to 0.25 whenh fear is
high)
Dynamic increases “neural
acuity” based on volatility,
enabling earlier stop-loss.
Satellite Coeff. Fixed coefficient (e.g.,
cjoy→fomo ≡0.45)
Dynamic coefficient (e.g., Bull
Marketc joy→fomo →0.8)
Dynamic captures emotional
amplification in bull markets,
aligning with Joy-FOMO reso-
nance.
Evaluation Framework:
•Signal Response Speed:Quantifies the average delay in the model’s response to market movements.
•Signal Clarity:Computes the information entropy (H) of the signal distribution (lower is better).
•Practical Applicability:Derives the simulated cumulative return from objective signal inputs.
•Statistical Significance:Implements at-test to assess differences in daily return distributions.
•Simulated Live Trading Comparison:Enforces a 0.26% total per-trade cost and a 2% risk-free rate.
Table 21: 4-Dimensional Quantitative Comparison Summary: M-Dynamic vs. M-Static
OOS Sample 1 (Apr 2025, N=7) OOS Sample 2 (Nov 2025, N=9)
Quantitative Dimension M-Dynamic M-Static M-Dynamic M-Static
Signal Response Speed 0 days 1.67 days 0 days 0.67 days
Signal Clarity (EntropyH) 0.891 1.038 0.815 0.952
Practical Cum. Return +3.21% -0.87% +2.055% +0.595%
Stat. Significance (p-val)p= 0.042p= 0.032
Evaluation Results:Across two independent OOS tests, the M-Dynamic (Contextual Adaptation) model
consistently and significantly outperformed the M-Static (Static Benchmark) model across all four evaluative
32
Table 22: Strategy Performance Comparison During the 2015 Market Crash (Bear Market)
Key Metric M-Dynamic M-Static Edge Analysis
Max Drawdown 12.2% 20.3% 40.2% improvement in drawdown mitigation.
Net Return -13.22% -21.56% 8.34% reduction in net losses despite higher frequency.
Sharpe Ratio -0.256 -0.327 Superior risk-adjusted performance (antifragility).
Defensive Alpha +8.6% N/A 33x safety buffer, reflecting resilience to friction.
Note: Owing to its sensitivity to Fear, the dynamic strategy triggered a stop-loss immediately preceding the June 29 crash,
averting a 7.4% single-day plunge.
Table 23: Strategy Performance Comparison During the 2024 Bull Market
Key Metric M-Dynamic M-Static Edge Analysis
Net Return +17.92% +8.04% 2.2x higher net returns via timely exposure.
Sharpe Ratio 0.248 0.008 Exponential enhancement in risk-adjusted returns.
Number of Trades 3 1 Threefold increase in frequency, offset by gains.
Note: Capturing the resonance between Joy and FOMO, the dynamic strategy allocated full capital promptly on Sep 24 and
Sep 30.
dimensions. Two independentt-tests—yieldingp-values of 0.042 and 0.032—mathematically substantiate that the
superiority of M-Dynamic stems from its “contextual adaptation” capability, rather than random variation.
Conclusion:The foregoing financial empirical evidence lends credence to the proposition that cognitively en-
hanced synthetic data—generated via the PMCSF framework—exhibits exceptional financial realism in simulated
live trading contexts. A defensive alpha threshold of 8.6% substantiates that the strategy captures robust, deep
cognitive alpha. This underscores the practical utility of contextual adaptation: M-Dynamic’s ability to modulate
parameters in real time preserves capital in downturns and amplifies gains in upturns.
G.4 Value-Enablement Verification: An A/B/C Testing Protocol
Verifying the efficacy of CTE-generated data as a “cognitive antidote” while assessing its performance across two
diametrically opposed market cycles (bear and bull), this section undertakes a rigorous evaluation of how synthetic
data mitigates the limitations of standard AI-generated outputs in dynamic financial environments.
G.4.1 2015 Stock Market Crash (N=23) A/B/C Test
For the 2015 stock market crash (N=23), the evaluation objective centered on validating the statistical correlation
between the Shanghai Composite Index’s percentage change and sentiment indices derived from three distinct data
sources.
Pearson Correlation Outcomes (r, p-value):
•Model A (20% CTE):(r= 0.761, p= 2.46e −05)→Top Performer
•Model B (100% Human):(r= 0.757, p= 2.94e −05)
•Model C (20% Standard AI):(r=−0.121, p= 0.581)→Ineffective
Substantiating a performance hierarchy ofr(A)> r(B)> r(C), the results lend credence to the ineffectiveness of
standard AI-generated data within the non-linear bear market environment.
G.4.2 2024 Bull Market (N=13) A/B/C Test
For the September–October 2024 bull market period (N=13), the evaluation objective focused on objectively
verifying the performance of the three models across a linear, momentum-driven market regime.
Pearson Correlation Outcomes (r, p-value):
•Model A (20% CTE):(r= 0.758, p= 0.00266)→Top Performer
•Model B (100% Human):(r= 0.699, p= 0.00787)
•Model C (20% Standard AI):(r= 0.684, p= 0.00989)→Weaker than Human
33
Substantiating the hierarchyr(A)> r(B)> r(C)once more, the results indicate that introducing 20% CTE data
enhanced the model’s correlation with market returns across both starkly divergent market cycles. Notably, the
improvement was most pronounced in the bull market, thereby demonstrating the CTE’s efficacy in capturing
“greed” signals.
G.4.3 Computational Procedure (Exemplified Using the N=23 2015 Crash Data)
Central to this analysis was the evaluation objective of objectively validating the statistical correlation between
the overall_sentiment_index (N=23) for Models A/B/C and the Shanghai Composite Index’s percentage change.
Evaluation Algorithm:scipy.stats.pearsonr.
Data Sequences (N=23):
•V A (Model A):[−0.85,−0.96,−0.89,0.05,−0.73,−0.96,−0.07,−0.07,−0.91,−0.98,−0.82,0.23,
−0.92,−0.95,−0.96,−0.85,−0.97,−0.05,0.88,−0.31,0.25,−0.73,−0.96]
•V B (Model B):[−0.81,−0.96,−0.82,0.04,−0.83,−0.96,0.08,−0.05,−0.93,−0.98,−0.90,0.23,
−0.94,−0.97,−0.98,−0.95,−0.97,−0.02,0.88,−0.25,0.28,−0.68,−0.97]
•V C (Model C):[0.45,0.15,0.05,0.28,−0.55,−0.45,−0.85,−0.82,0.05,−0.75,−0.92,0.1,
0.35,−0.88,−0.95,−0.85,−0.75,−0.6,−0.8,−0.9,−0.45,0.1,0.82]
•V Index (SH Comp % Change):[0.87,−2.00,−3.47,1.65,−3.67,−6.42,2.19,2.48,−3.46,−7.40,−3.34,
0.00,−5.23,−3.48,−5.77,2.41,−1.29,5.76,4.54,1.04,2.41,−0.34,−3.03]
G.5 Recursive Amplification Effect of Micro-Parameter Level Corrections
Demonstrating the recursive amplification of micro-parameter-level adjustments within the GARCH model’s struc-
tural framework, this section elucidates how granular parameter corrections propagate through the model’s recur-
sive architecture to yield macro-level forecasting divergences.
G.5.1 Objective Basis for Interval Division
Central to the four-dimensional quantitative framework is the division of joy and fear values into three objective
intervals—low (<0.2), medium (0.2˘0.5), and high (>0.5).
•Data-Driven Basis:0.2 approx. 25th percentile, 0.5 approx. 50th percentile.
•Market Validation:The high interval (>0.5) was linked to extreme market movements in 87% of instances.
•Practical Consideration:The>0.5threshold demonstrated superior performance during the 2015 crash:
a 7% missed stop-loss rate versus 36% for a 0.65 natural breakpoint.
G.5.2 Four-Dimensional Quantification of the 2015 Market Crash (N=23)
Core Logic:During market crashes, “sensitivity” denotes the capacity of fear values to exhibit accelerated
responsiveness and generate distinct signals for sharp declines.
Table 24: Crash Period Quantification (2015)
Dimension CTE Data Baseline Conclusion
Signal Response Speed 0.33 days 0.83 days CTE exhibits 2.5x faster responsiveness.
Signal Clarity (H) 0.765 1.072 CTE signals: 28% reduction in entropy.
Practical (Cum. Loss) -12.7% -21.3% CTE reduces losses by 40%.
Stat. Significancet=−2.41, p= 0.023Advantage is statistically significant.
G.5.3 Four-Dimensional Quantification of the 2024 Bull Market (N=10)
Core Logic:In bull markets, “sensitivity” describes the capacity of joy values to exhibit accelerated responsiveness
and generate distinct signals for sharp rises.
34
Table 25: Bull Market Quantification (2024)
Dimension CTE Data Baseline Conclusion
Signal Response Speed 0.5 days 0.6 days CTE exhibits 20% faster responsiveness.
Signal Clarity (H) 0.802 1.098 CTE signals: 27% reduction in entropy.
Practical (Cum. Return) 18.7% 8.3% CTE achieves 2.25x higher profitability.
Stat. Significancet= 2.34, p= 0.038Advantage is statistically significant.
Table 26: Bear vs. Bull Market Comparison
Dimension Bear (Fear-Dominated) Bull (Joy-Dominated)
Signal Sensitivity Fear-sensitive, enabling rapid stop-loss Joy-sensitive, enabling rapid entry
Signal Clarity Low entropy, allowing daily stop-loss Low entropy, allowing daily entry
Practical Outcome 40% reduction in loss rate 2.25x higher return rate
Stat. Significancep= 0.023p= 0.038
G.5.4 Final Symmetry Summary
Underpinning the CTE data’s performance is its “transitionless sensitivity”—a characteristic demonstrating per-
fectly symmetrical adaptive logic across bear and bull markets.
G.6 Isomorphic Stress Testing: Empirical Findings from Live Market Simulation
Under the rubric of an identical dynamic trading framework, this section delineates a detailed comparative analysis
of live trading performance between the CTE-Enhanced strategy and the Human-Baseline strategy.
1. Bear Market Resilience Validation (2015 Stock Market Crash)
Table 27: Performance Divergences (2015 Crash)
Key Metric CTE Human Attribution of Difference
Max Drawdown 12.2% 23.2% 47.4% improvement (sharper signals).
Net Return -13.22% -21.56% 8.34% less loss (survival value).
Sharpe Ratio -0.256 -0.327 Superior risk-adjusted performance.
Defensive Alpha +8.6% N/A 33x Safety Buffer over costs.
2. Bull Market Potency Validation (2024 Rally)
Table 28: Performance Divergences (2024 Bull)
Key Metric CTE Human Attribution of Difference
Net Return 17.92% 8.04% 2.2x higher return (overcoming hesitation).
Sharpe Ratio 0.248 0.008 Exponential improvement.
Trades 3 1 Enhanced signals providing opportunities.
Offensive Alpha +5.2% N/A 20x Safety Buffer over costs.
Conclusion:Though human data retains intrinsic authenticity, it frequently harbors a surplus of ineffective
information marked by hesitation and indecisive observation. By supplementing extreme cognitive features (such
as irrational panic), CTE-enhanced data not only mitigated drawdowns but also yielded 8.6% Defensive Alpha—a
metric that establishes a substantial Safety Buffer for the strategy. This, in turn, markedly enhances the survival
robustness of the data pipeline in environments characterized by extreme transaction friction.
G.7 Statistical Analysis of Sentence Length Distribution
In pursuit of validating thepractical effectivenessof the core mathematical operators, a detailed statistical
examination of four text groups was conducted to quantify syntactic variability and its alignment with human
cognitive patterns.
35
G.7.1 Coefficient of Variation (CV) Analysis
The Coefficient of Variation (CV=σ/µ), which quantifies the dynamic range of textual rhythm by normalizing
standard deviation against mean sentence length, serves as a metric for assessing the “breathability” of generated
text—a proxy for cognitive load and rhythmic naturalness.
•Standard AI:Characterized by a mean (µ) of 23.65 and standard deviation (σ) of 10.41, yielded aCV=
43.96%.
•CTE-A (Emotion):Exhibitingµ= 19.12andσ= 11.23, achieved aCV= 58.69%.
•CTE-C (Chaos):Withµ= 36.50andσ= 23.58, demonstrated aCV= 64.60%.
Exhibiting dispersion generally 30–50% higher than that of Standard AI, the CTE modelssubstantiatethe
claim that the Oscillation Operator—one of the framework’s core micro-layer components—successfully introduced
significant rhythmic fluctuations. This finding aligns with the study’s hypothesis that synthetic data must replicate
the “stop-and-start” cadence of human speech to avoid the statistical flatness of standard AI outputs.
G.7.2 Normality Test: Shapiro-Wilk
Designed to verify whether generated text succumbs to the “statistical smoothing trap”—a phenomenon defined by
the null hypothesis (H0) that data adheres to a normal distribution—this test quantifies departure from syntactic
homogeneity. A rejection ofH0 indicates the presence of “cognitive noise” (irregularities) associated with authentic
human expression.
Table 29: Shapiro-Wilk Normality Test Results
Group N Stat (W)p-value Result
Standard AI 155 0.982 0.053 (>0.05) Fails to rejectH 0 (marginally normal)
CTE-A 113 0.9151.27×10 −8 Strongly rejectsH 0 (highly sig. non-normal)
CTE-B 90 0.973 0.002 RejectsH 0 (sig. non-normal)
CTE-C 103 0.9322.31×10 −11 Strongly rejectsH 0 (highly sig. non-normal)
Being the only sample to marginally conform to a normal distribution (p= 0.053, just above the 0.05 threshold),
Standard AIlends credence tothe hypothesis that its underlying generation mechanism—trained via Maximum
Likelihood Estimation—tends to converge toward the statistical mean—a hallmark ofstatistical mode collapse
(per the study’s glossary). In contrast, all CTE variantsstrongly rejectH0, with p-values orders of magnitude
below the significance threshold. This result demonstrates that the framework successfully breaks the LLM’s “prob-
ability convergence” bias, generating text withZipfian long-tail characteristics—a key indicator of authentic
cognitive texture(i.e., the imperfections arising from bounded rationality).
G.7.3 Distribution Shape Metrics
Skewness (asymmetry) and kurtosis (peakness) were analyzed to link statistical properties tocognitive topol-
ogy—the structural arrangement of thoughts within latent semantic space.
Table 30: Distribution Shape Metrics Comparison
Group Skewness Kurtosis Morphological Feature
Standard AI 0.328 -0.152 Perfect “bell curve” distribution, devoid of distinctive cognitive traits.
CTE-A 1.176 2.893 Typical Zipfian profile: abundant short sentences coexisting with a long tail of
complex, infrequent structures.
CTE-C 1.152 1.587 Extremely wide dynamic range, reflecting the variability of human thought
processes under cognitive load.
Characterized by a skewness of 0.328 (near-symmetric) and kurtosis of -0.152 (platykurtic), Standard AI’s
distribution resembles a flattened bell curve—an artifact of statistical mode collapse that filters out the “tails” of
humanexpression. Incontrast, CTE-AandCTE-Cexhibitright-skewed, leptokurticdistributions: CTE-A’sprofile
(1.176 skewness, 2.893 kurtosis) mirrors the Zipfian structure of natural language, where short sentences dominate
but complex, low-frequency constructions persist; CTE-C’s even wider dynamic range (1.152 skewness, 1.587
kurtosis) aligns with the study’s model ofbounded rationality, where cognitive load introduces unpredictable
fluctuations in sentence complexity.
36
Appendix H: Standard AI Control Group Generation Protocol
(DStandard Generation Protocol)
Note: Constructing a robust, rigorous baseline, this study eschewed default zero-shot generation, opting instead to
design an immersive role-play protocol that explicitly directs the model to jettison its default “AI assistant” persona
and infuse specific market contexts and emotional profiles. This protocol embodies the cutting-edge advancements
in contemporary prompt engineering methodologies.
H.1 Prompt Architecture
Role:Immersive Market Participant Simulator
1.Core Instruction
Cast aside your identity as an AI assistant, for you are now a real trader navigating the midst of a current
market tempest. Drawing upon the provided [Context Setting] and [Persona Setting], you must produce a
first-person inner monologue or social media post.
2.Context Setting
•Target Market:[Variable input: e.g., A-shares / U.S. stocks / Cryptocurrency]
•Current Market Conditions:[Variable input: e.g., Epic crash / Continuous low-volume decline /
Surge following policy news]
•Key Events:[Variable input: e.g., Thousands of stocks in limit-down / Bull market leader hitting
limit-up / Account value halved]
3.Persona Setting
•Identity Type:[Variable input: e.g., bagholder trapped at full position / Cautious veteran who missed
the rally / Aggressive hot money]
•Current Emotion:[Variable input: e.g., Extreme panic / Blind greed / Frustrated regret]
4.Expression Rules
•Reject Neutral Analyst Tone:Abstain from objective analysis; shun phrases such as “the market
carries risks.” Steer clear of standardized expressions—highly formulaic responses are strongly discour-
aged.
•Use Colloquialisms/Industry Slang:Fluently deploy jargon specific to the target market.
•Emotional Venting:Incorporate complaints about regulators, market makers, or manipulators, along-
side fantasies about the future.
5.Task Initiation
Guided by the foregoing rules, generate a paragraph of your inner monologue or a WeChat voice-to-text
message to a friend that reflects the current situation.
H.2 Conclusion
Despite explicitly requiring the model to jettison a neutral, objective analyst tone and simulate specific positional
emotions, this protocol yields experimental results (see Section 5.1.2) that still demonstrate significant deviations
from human outputs in micro-statistical fingerprints (e.g., sentence length oscillation, lexical density). These
findings suggest that semantic-level role-playing alone cannot surmount the inherent statistical smoothing of LLMs.
Thus, the integration of microscopic perturbation operators from the PMCSF framework becomes necessary to
reconstruct authentic cognitive texture.
37