1 
 
Sentiment Analysis and Emotion Classification using Machine Learning 
Techniques for Nagamese Language – A Low-resource Language  
Ekha Morang1, Surhoni A. Ngullie1, Sashienla Longkumer1 and Teisovi Angami1* 
1Department of Information Technology, Nagaland University, Dimapur Campus, Nagaland, India 
*E-Mail: teisovi@nagalanduniversity.ac.in, teisovi@gmail.com  
*Corresponding Author 
 
Abstract — The Nagamese language, a.k.a Naga Pidgin, is an Assamese-lexified creole language 
developed primarily as a means of communication in trade between the people from Nagaland and people 
from Assam in the north-east India. Substantial amount of work in sentiment analysis has been done 
for resource-rich languages like English, Hindi, etc. However, no work has been done in Nagamese  
language. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt on sentiment a nalysis and emotion 
classification for the Nagamese Language. The aim of this work is to detect  sentiments in terms of 
polarity (positive, negative and neutral) and basic emotions cont ained in textual content of Nagamese 
language. We b uild sentiment polarity lexicon  of 1,195 n agamese words  and use these to build  
features along with additional features for supervised machine learning techniques using Naïve Bayes 
and Support Vector Machines. 
Keywords: Nagamese, NLP, sentiment analysis, machine learning 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Nagamese (Naga Pidgin ) is an important Creole language , apart from the tribal languages spoken  
which is used as a common language across the entire state of Nagaland which is located in the North-
Eastern part of India. It is an Assamese-lexified (Assam is an Indian state bordering Nagaland) creole 
language developed primarily as a means of communica tion in trade between the people of Nagaland 
and people from Assam. It is widely used in mass media in the news, radio stations, state-government 
media, etc. The Nagamese language is a resource -poor language, and therefore, it is a challenge to 
create resources for applying various language processing tasks. 
Sentiment Analysis is a natural language processing  (NLP) task that deals with capturing the 
opinion or sentiment of the person towards something such as an object, event, etc. The target of 
Sentiment Analysis is to find these opinions, identify the sentiments expressed, and then classify them 
in terms of their polarity  such as  positive sentiment, negative sentiment or , neutral sentiment . 
Identifying the emotion of a person is the task in which emotions such as anger, joy, etc., are captured. 
These tasks are useful in building applications such as  predicting market trend based on sentiment 
analysis, prediction of election results based on emotion distribution, etc. 
2 
 
The aim of this work is to identify the sentiment and emotion contained in Nagamese textual 
content. The objectives of this research are: 
- Classification of sentiments in terms of polarity ( positive, negative , and neutral ) in the textual 
content of Nagamese language. 
- Classification of basic emotions (anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, surprise, and trust) 
contained in the textual content of Nagamese language. 
- Building sentiment polarity lexicons and using  this to build features along with additional features 
for supervised machine learning techniques using Naïve Bayes and Support Vector Machines. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an introduction to the Nagamese 
Language, Section 3 gives an over view of the related works, Sec tion 4 describes the dataset creation, 
Section 5 discusses the methodology in detail, Section 6 provides details of the  experimental setup, 
Section 7 discusses the experimental results and Section 8 draws the conclu sion and discusses future 
works 
2. THE NAGAMESE LANGUAGE 
This section provides an overview of the character set , syllabic pattern, grammar, lexical , and other 
resources for the Nagamese Language. 
2.1 Character Set for Nagamese Language 
The Nagamese language has 28 phonemes, including 6 vowels and 22 consonants (Sreedhar 1985). 
Vowels: i, u, e, ǝ, o, a 
Consonants: p, t, c, k, b, d, j, g, ph, th, ch, kh, m, n, ń, s, š, h, r, l, w, y 
An example sentence in Nagamese is given below: 
‘Moy dos baje pora yeti ase.’ (I am waiting here from 10 o’clock.) 
2.2 Syllabic Pattern 
A Nagamese word may consist of one or more syllables ranging upto a maximum of four sylla bles 
(Sreedhar 1985). The entire monosyllabic words can be subgrouped into six classes as given in the 
formula: 
(C) (C) V (C) (C)2 
The only limitation in the above formula is that V cannot occur alone. 
3 
 
Nagamese exhibits disyllabic, trisyllabic, and tetra syllalabic. There are no pentasyllabic words unless 
one takes clear compound words. 
2.3 Grammar 
Nagamese is a Subject -Object-Verb (SOV) (Singh 2021) language similar to other Indian languages 
such as Hindi, Assamese, etc. The detail ed grammar of Nagamese  can be found in the works of 
Sreedhar (1985), Baishya (2003), and Bhattacharjya (2003).  
2.4 Lexical and Other Resources 
Listed below are some of the lexical and other resources that are available for Nagamese Language. 
Table 1: Nagamese resources 
Resource name Remarks 
The Dictionary of Nagamese Language: 
Nagamese-English-Assamese by Bhim Kanta 
Boruah. 
This Dictionary contains the lexical category 
(POS information) of every word. 
https://nagamesekhobor.com/ Contains news articles in the Nagamese 
Language. 
Nagamese Bible (BSI) Can be accessed online from the weblink 
https://www.bible.com/bible/3335/MAT.1.IS
VNAG 
Books, Hymns, etc written in Nagamese - 
Social Media contents in facebook, twitter, etc - 
 
3. RELATED WORKS 
Since Nagamese is an Assamese-lexified creole language, we present here some of the works that have 
been done for the Assamese language.  
Das et  al. (2021) built a  sentiment polarity classification model by applying machine learning 
classifiers for Assamese language using lexical features like adjectives, adverbs, and verbs on the 
news domain. 
Dev et al. (2021) attempt to perform Sentiment Analysis on Assamese Texts  using the concepts of 
popular sentiment analyzer named ―Vader‖, while taking ―Bengali-Vader‖ as its backbone.  
Das et al. (2022) presented an Assamese multimodal dataset from the news domain and proposed a 
multi-stage multimodal sentiment analysis framewo rk that uses textual and visual cues to determine 
the sentiment.  
Das et al. (2023) introduced an image–text multimodal sentiment analysis framework , i.e., Textual 
Visual Multimodal Fusion for Assamese. In their work, they  also built an Assamese news articles 
4 
 
dataset consisting of news text and associated images and one image caption to conduct an 
experimental study.  
Dev et  al. (2023a) investigated sentiment classification on Assamese textual data using a dataset 
created by tran slating Bengali resources into Assamese using Google Translator. The work employs 
supervised ML methods , such as  Decision Tree, K -nearest neighbour, Multinomial Naive Bayes, 
Logistic Regression, and Support Vector Machine, etc.  
Dev et al. (2023b) proposed a deep neural network hybrid model, combining Convolutional Neural 
Network (CNN) and Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM), termed LSTM -CNN, in predicting 
sentiment polarity for Assamese.  
Das et  al. (2024) proposed a hybrid fusion -based multimodal sentiment analysis framework , i.e., 
textual, visual, and multimodal systems for the Assamese news domain. They used lexical features 
and specific image objects, creating a feature-level fusion to introduce multimodal for joint sentiment 
classification. 
4. DATASET CREATION 
To apply any learning model, we need to create a training dataset to train the learning model. This 
section describes the details of the annotated sentiment polarity and the emotion dataset. The 
unlabelled dataset containing approx. 25k tokens and 1,195 unique words was created by collecting 
articles from online Nagamese News articles (https://nagamesekhobor.com/ ) and bible passages  
(https://www.bible.com/). The Nagamese Khobor contains a variety of content related to current state 
affairs, sports etc. Random news articles from Nagamese khobor were  collected from which various 
articles were extracte d in order to obtain a mixed corpus  of 594 Nagamese sentences . This was 
equally distributed among annotators of 198 sentences each. Fig. 1 shows the word cloud for the 
Nagamese raw dataset based on the word frequency in the unlabelled dataset. Fig. 2 shows the sample 
of labelling dataset. Fig. 3 provides the polarity percentage in the labelled dataset. And Fig. 4 provides 
the emotion distribution of the labelled dataset. 
5 
 
 
Fig. 1: Raw dataset word frequency 
 
Fig. 2: Sample annotated dataset 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Polarity percentage 
Fig. 4: Emotion distribution 
6 
 
5. METHODOLOGY 
In our methodology, we build a  sentiment dictionary of 1,195 N agamese words which is used to 
generate additional features for the classification purpose. This section provide s details of the 
sentiment dictionary, which has been used to build features for applying the machine learning models, 
along with other features. 
5.1 Sentiment Dictionary 
From the unique words list collected, we categorized them into positive, negative, and neutral. Table 2 
provides the details of the sentiment dictionary.  Table 3 shows some example words in the Sentiment 
dictionary.  
Table 2: Sentiment dictionary 
Sentiment No. of words 
Positive 162 
Negative 162 
Neutral 871 
 
 
 Table 3: Sentiment dictionary example words 
Sentiment words 
Positive aramse, asis, bachabole, laap, modop, ujala, chanbin, bhal, biswas, 
hosiyar, jeetibo,... 
Negative bothnam, bhoe, biya, chamala, diktar, gali, galdi, hamlaa, karikena, 
jokhom, larai,... 
Neutral aage, ahibo, anibo, ase, banaisile, bhabesi, bhitor, bosti, dikheshe, 
ghumaise, that,... 
 
5.2 Feature generation 
For the purpose of creating features for the machine learning models, we selected the features based 
on the sentiment dictionary and other features . We generate the count of positive, negative , and 
neutral words using the sentiment dictionary that we built. We used the same set of features for 
sentiment polarity and emotion classification. The complete list of features used is mentioned below. 
Features for prediction: 
1. Length of the sentence. 
2. Count of positive words. 
3. Count of negative words. 
4. Count of neutral words. 
5. Count of positive intensity words. 
6. Count of negative intensity words. 
7. Occurrence of the word ―bisi‖ (A lot/large). 
8. Occurrence of the word ―olop‖ (small/less). 
9. Occurrence of the emoticon . 
10. Occurrence of the emoticon . 
11. Occurrence of the exclamation mark. 
12. Occurrence of the question mark. 
7 
 
 
From the full list of features, we selected the best features for the classification as given below. 
Best features set for prediction: 
1. Count of positive words. 
2. Count of negative words. 
3. Count of positive intensity words. 
4. Count of negative intensity words. 
5. Occurrence of the word ―bisi‖ (A lot/large). 
6. Occurrence of the word ―olop‖ (small/less). 
7. Occurrence of the emoticon . 
8. Occurrence of the emoticon . 
9.  Occurrence of the exclamation mark.  
6.  EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
For our experiments, we have chosen the Naïve Bayes Webb (2010) and Support Vector Machines 
(SVM) Hearst (1998) Machine Learning  Classifiers. The c lass labels for Sentence polarity  are 
positive, negative, and neutral; and emotion s are anger, anticipation, disgust, fear, joy, sadness, 
surprise, and trust. 
To evaluate our learning models, we sp lit the annotated dataset into 4 94 and 100 sentences for 
training and testing, respectively, as shown in Table 4. 
Table 4: Training and test dataset 
Particulars No. of sentences 
Training 494 
Test 100 
Total 594 
For implementation, we use d scikit-learn (https://scikit-learn.org/), which is an open-source machine 
learning library for the Python programming language . For Naïve Bayes, we import GaussianNB 
class. For SVM, we import the SVC class. We perform the SVM experiments for linear, poly and rbf 
kernels, and the best result is reported. Other parameter settings for the SVC are shown below: 
SVC(C=1.0, cache_size=200, class_weight=None, coef0=0.0, decision_function_shape='ovr', 
degree=3, gamma='auto', kernel='rbf', max_iter= -1, probability=False, random_state=None, 
shrinking=True, tol=0.001, verbose=False) 
7. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS & DISCUSSIONS 
This section reports the sentiment polarity and emotion classification results for the machine learning 
techniques. Table 5 reports the performance evaluation of sentiment classification for the experiments 
that we conducted. The accuracy is calculated using the  accuracy_score class from sklearn.metrics. 
We obtain the highest accuracy for both sentiment and emotion using SVM classifier , with a score of 
71% using rbf kernel and 67% respectively  using poly kernel. Table 6 shows the SVM polarity 
classification accuracy details in terms of precision, recall and f1 -score for each sentiment class. We 
8 
 
obtained f1-score of 0.58 for negative, 0.69 for neutral, and 0.76 for positive. Table 7 shows the SVM 
emotion classification accuracy details in terms of precision, recall , and f1 -score for each emotion 
class. We obtained the highest f1 -score of 1.00 for fear and surprise , and least of 0.00 for anger and 
trust. 
 
Table 5: Performance evaluation of sentiment classification  
ML technique sentiment 
accuracy 
emotion 
accuracy 
Naive Bayes 59% 21% 
SVM 71% 67% 
 
 
Table 6: SVM polarity classification accuracy details 
polarity precision recall f1-
score 
negative 0.64 0.54 0.58 
neutral 0.70 0.68 0.69 
positive 0.73 0.78 0.76 
 
 
 Table 7: SVM emotion classification accuracy details 
emotion precision recall f1-
score 
anger 0.00 0.00 0.00 
anticipation 0.68 0.67 0.68 
disgust 1.00 0.50 0.67          
fear 1.00 1.00 1.00 
joy 0.62 0.78 0.69 
sadness 1.00 0.67 0.80 
surprise 1.00 1.00 1.00 
trust 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
 
  
 Fig 5. Polarity classification confusion 
matrix 
Fig 6. Emotion classification confusion 
matrix 
9 
 
Fig. 5 and 6 show  the confusion matrix for sentiment polarity and emotion classification. We show 
the actual and the predicted class  count. For sentiment polarity, we observe 4 instances of negative 
classified as neutral, 2 instances classified as positive; 2 instances of neutral classified as negative, 11 
instances as positive; 2 instances of positive classified as negative, and 8 ins tances as neutral. For 
emotion classification, we observe  misclassification of anticipation to joy (11 instances), joy to 
anticipation (8 instances), trust to joy (4 instances), trust to anticipation (3 instances), anticipation to 
anger (2 instances), ange r to joy (1 instance), disgust to joy (1 instance), sadness to anticipation (1 
instance), and sadness to joy (1 instance). 
8. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORKS 
This work focuses on sentiment polarity and emotion classification for the Nagamese Language  and 
its. In this paper, we build an annotated corpus of 594 manually labelled sentences in Nagamese to 
apply machine learnin g techniques. We also built  a sentiment dictionary of 1,195 N agamese words 
which is used in generating features for the classification purpose. We then predicted sentiment 
polarity and emotion by building classifier using ML techniques such as Naïve Bayes and SVM.  We 
achieved the highest accuracy of 70.71% for polarity and  67% for emotion on our test dataset. It is 
intended to create a larger dataset in the future and explore other machine and deep learning models. 
 
 
References 
Baishya, A.K. (2003). The structure of nagamese the contact language of naga - land (Doctoral 
dissertation, Assam University). Retrieved 2024-04-22, from http://hdl.handle.net/10603/92670 
Bhattacharjya, D. (2003). The genesis and development of nagamese: Its social history and linguistic 
structure. University Microfilms, Assam, India. 
Das, R., & Singh,  T. D. (2021). A step towards sentiment analysis of assamese news articles using 
lexical features. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computing and Communication 
Systems: I3CS 2020, NEHU, Shillong, India (pp. 15-23). Springer Singapore. 
Das, R., & Singh, T. D. (2022). A multi -stage multimodal framework for sentiment analysis of 
Assamese in low resource setting. Expert Systems with Applications, 204, 117575. 
Das, R., & Singh, T. D. (2023). Image–Text Multimodal Sentiment Analysis Framework of Assamese 
News Articles Using Late Fusion. ACM Transactions on Asian and Low -Resource Language 
Information Processing, 22(6), 1-30. 
Das, R., & Singh, T. D. (2024). A hybrid fusion -based machine learning framework to improve 
sentiment prediction of assamese in low resource setting. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 83(8), 
22153-22172. 
Dev, C., Ganguly, A., & Borkakoty, H. (2021). Assamese VADER: a sentiment analysis approach 
using modified VADER. In 2021 International Conference on Intelligent Technologies ( CONIT) (pp. 
1-5). IEEE. 
10 
 
Dev, C., & Ganguly, A. (2023a). Sentiment Analysis of Assamese Text Reviews: Supervised Machine 
Learning Approach with Combined n -gram and TF -IDF Feature. ADBU Journal of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering (AJEEE), 5(2), 18-30. 
Dev, C., & Ganguly, A. (2023b). Sentiment Analysis of Review Data: A Deep Learning Approach 
Using User-Generated Content. Asian Journal of Electrical Sciences, 12(2), 28-36. 
Hearst, M. A., Dumais, S. T., Osuna, E., Platt, J., & Scholkopf, B. (1998). Support vector 
machines. IEEE Intelligent Systems and their applications, 13(4), 18-28. 
Shreedhar, M. (1985). Standardized grammar of naga pidgin. CIIL, Mysore. 
Singh, R. (2021). A comparative analysis of Assamese and Nagamese compound words, Language in 
India. 
Webb, G. I., Keogh, E., & Miikkulainen, R. (2010). Naïve Bayes.  Encyclopedia of machine 
learning, 15(1), 713-714. 
 
  