World Model Robustness via Surprise Recognition
Geigh Zollicoffer∗, Tanush Chopra∗, Mingkuan Yan, Xiaoxu Ma, Kenneth Eaton, Mark Riedl
Georgia Institute of Technology
{gzollicoffer3, tchopra32, myan71, xma394, keaton30, riedl}@gatech.edu *
Abstract
AI systems deployed in the real world must contend with
distractions and out-of-distribution (OOD) noise that can
destabilize their policies and lead to unsafe behavior. While
robust training can reduce sensitivity to some forms of
noise, it is infeasible to anticipate all possible OOD con-
ditions. To mitigate this issue, we develop an algorithm
that leverages a world model’s inherent measure of sur-
prise to reduce the impact of noise in world model–based
reinforcement learning agents. We introduce both multi-
representation and single-representation rejection sam-
pling, enabling robustness to settings with multiple faulty
sensors or a single faulty sensor. While the introduction
of noise typically degrades agent performance, we show
that our techniques preserve performance relative to base-
lines under varying types and levels of noise across mul-
tiple environments within self-driving simulation domains
(CARLA and Safety Gymnasium). Furthermore, we demon-
strate that our methods enhance the stability of two state-
of-the-art world models with markedly different underlying
architectures: Cosmos and DreamerV3. Together, these re-
sults highlight the robustness of our approach across world
modeling domains. We release our code athttps://
github.com/Bluefin-Tuna/WISER.
1. Introduction
AI systems that operate in the real world can often en-
counter noise, distractions, environmental interference,
transmission errors, or new semantic classes of objects.
When these occur, AI policies—the part of the AI system
that translates from observation to action—can become un-
predictable, unreliable, or unsafe. When observations con-
tain out-of-distribution noise, the policy may respond inap-
propriately to the noise, resulting in execution that is unsafe
to the agent or to any human operators in the vicinity.
At the heart of the challenge, an AI system cannot know
what is noise and what is actionable information in the ob-
*∗Equal contribution
servation. While AI system developers may do their best
to train systems that are robust to as many types of noise
as possible, in real-world settings, it is impossible to an-
ticipate all possible ways in which sensor information may
be corrupted. That is: AI systems can always encounter
noise and distractors that are interpreted incorrectly. Yet,
we may be able to design AI systems that degrade grace-
fully by being able to (a) identify when parts of their obser-
vations are likely to be noise versus actionable information
and (b) learn how to make smarter decisions despite the lack
of actionable information.
In the context of world model-based deep reinforcement
learning agents, we present a technique for improving the
resilience of an agent whenpartsof an observation are
likely to be noise and/or completely corrupted. We use the
agent’s world model to evaluate the amount ofsurprisein
the observational data. We apply this to multi-sensor and
single-sensor agent settings. Multi-sensor settings are those
in which an agent has multiple sensors to which a policy
model responds, or has multiple representations of the same
raw observational data. For example, in automated driving,
a policy may integrate inputs from cameras, LiDAR, and
radar, or fuse both pixel-level images and semantic maps
derived from the same visual stream. It is likely that the
underlying cause of the noise does not affect all sensors or
representations equally. In this setting, the surprise measure
is used to help identify which sensors are likely to distract
the agent and to disable those sensors.
While the above is useful for agents that have multiple
sensors, such as self-driving cars, some agents may only
have a single sensor. In the single-sensor setting, we use the
world model’s abnormal reconstruction of the observation
as a signal to help avoid making decisions on observations
that are likely to be distractions or misinterpreted by the
agent. In both settings, we show that our technique is able to
reduce the amount of noise introduced to the world model’s
internal state.
Although the introduction or removal of noise typically
degrades agent performance, we show that our techniques
preserve performance relative to baselines under varying
types and levels of noise across multiple environments
1
arXiv:2512.01119v1  [cs.LG]  30 Nov 2025
within self-driving simulation domains (CARLA [6] and
Safety Gymnasium [18]). Furthermore, we demonstrate
that our methods enhance the stability of two state-of-the-
art world models with markedly different underlying archi-
tectures: Cosmos [24] and DreamerV3 [13]. Together, these
results demonstrate the robustness of our approach across
world modeling domains.
Figure 1. The change in the world model’s measure of sur-
prise as noise increases in all tested CARLA [6] and Safety-
Gymnasium [6] environments over 15000 sampled steps per in-
tensity. We leverage this insight to understand the degree to which
surprise signal can help identify noise given the absence of ground
truth.
2. Related Work
Improving the robustness of reinforcement learning (RL)
agents against noise capabilities largely remains a difficult
challenge [30]. Procedural generation has been employed to
improve agent robustness to novel scenarios [5], often rely-
ing on data augmentation techniques [31]. However, these
approaches can lead to high sample complexity [22]. A fur-
ther complication is the burden on the policy to learn a wide
range of representations for rapid adaptation [7].
Recent work has also focused on identifying irrelevant
components of the observation space to enhance generaliza-
tion [3, 16, 28, 34]. Such methods often rely on foundation
models or Siamese-like architectures during the training
process, which can significantly increase training time [9].
Moreover, these frameworks may require an augmented
dataset for initial training on similar OOD situations to the
target domain, or are tested in cases where the task-relevant
information is always present. Simple Gaussian noise, de-
spite the OOD situation, has been proposed to help models
learn OOD scenarios, but might not be effective in certain
situations [25].
A promising approach for improving model robustness
is the use of dropouts across various sensors or multimodal
representations [21, 26, 27, 32]. However, these meth-
ods typically ignore the issue of determining which sen-
sors to mask out or assume that the agent can already iden-
tify which sensors have failed or have become corrupted—a
challenging problem in itself [20]. Another limitation is that
such dropout techniques often provide limited insight into
how accurately an agent can predict actions using only the
remaining modalities, and often leave the dropout strategy
unchanged in the evaluation domain [27].
World models [11] have recently been shown to have
some success in out-of-distribution scenarios [36] that can-
not be taken into account during training. Specifically, re-
sults have shown that utilizing the world model’s measure of
surprise does appear to be a useful heuristic in detecting if
an agent’s observation is out of distribution. We investigate
whether world models can mitigate the issues seen in previ-
ous dropout-related frameworks in RL from the perspective
of state representation for novel situations.
Fault Detection, Isolation, Recovery (FDIR) [2, 29] is
a common technique for removing noise, which, at a high
level, aims to shut off or mitigate the impact of known faulty
sensors. For physical systems, such as automotive appli-
cations, this typically manifests through the deployment of
multiple redundant sensors that measure the same physical
state. This redundancy is typically used to enable potential
cross-validation among sensors, allowing faulty readings to
be detected and suppressed while preserving overall system
integrity [4].
In our work, we do not assume access to redundant sen-
sors, as they would experience the same OOD noisy fail-
ures. Instead, we assume the potential of having different
data per sensor or a single sensor with different representa-
tions of the data. We design an FDIR algorithm centered on
world models so the agent can focus on consistent and infor-
mative inputs when noise or sensor failures are observed.
3. Preliminaries
Partially observable Markov Decision ProcessesWe
study sequential Partially Observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs) denoted by the tupleM=
(S,A,T, r,Ω, O), whereSis the state space,Ais the ac-
tion space,Tis the transition distributionT(s t|st−1, at−1),
r is the reward function,Ωis an emissions model from
ground truth states to sensor information, andO(s ′, a)is
the sensory information distribution which emits an obser-
vationx ∗ ∼O(s ′, a)at each step [1].
DreamerV3 World ModelWe conduct experiments us-
ing our methods primarily within the DreamerV3 frame-
work [13], which is based on a Recurrent State-Space
Model (RSSM). A typical RSSM incorporates both a Varia-
tional Autoencoder (V AE) and a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN) [10, 11]. DreamerV3 first learns a world model and
then uses it to simulate rollouts for training a policy model.
Note that:
2
•x ∗ is the set of sensory information emitted from the state.
•x t is theencodedset of sensory information emitted from
the state.
•h t is the encoded history/hidden state of the agent.
•z t is an encoding of the current sensory informationx t
andh t that incorporates the learned dynamics of the
world.
•s t = (zt, ht)is the agent’s compact model state.
• At each step, the agent takes an action based on the com-
pact model state (i.eπ(s t) =π((z t, ht)))
For each representation of states t, DreamerV3 defines six
additional learned transition distributions—each condition-
ally independent—based on the trained world model:
DreamerV3:



Sequence model:h t =f ϕ(ht−1, zt−1, at−1)
Representation model:q ϕ(zt|ht, xt)
Dynamics predictor:p ϕ( ˆzt|ht)
Image prediction model:p ϕ( ˆxt|ht, zt)
Reward prediction model:p ϕ( ˆrt|ht, zt)
Continue prediction model:p ϕ( ˆct|ht, zt)
(1)
whereϕdescribes the parameter vector for all distributions
optimized. The loss function during training [13] is:
L(ϕ) .=E qϕ
h TX
t=1
(βpredLpred(ϕ)+
βdynLdyn(ϕ) +β repLrep(ϕ))
i
.
where:
Lpred(ϕ) .=−lnp ϕ(xt |z t, ht)
−lnp ϕ(rt |z t, ht)−lnp ϕ(ct |z t, ht)
Ldyn(ϕ) .= max

1, KL

sg(qϕ(zt |h t, xt))
 pϕ(zt |h t)

Lrep(ϕ) .= max

1, KL

qϕ(zt |h t, xt)
 sg(pϕ(zt |h t))

andsg(·)is a stop gradient operator.
4. Multiple Sensor Representation Selection
In this section, we address the multiple-sensor representa-
tion setting and describe how a surprise measure on the
world model identifies and eliminates sensor representa-
tions that are likely to distract the agent with noisy data.
The multiple sensor setting could mean that an agent has
multiple sensors that collect different data, such as in the
case of an autonomous vehicle with cameras with different
views. It could also mean an agent with a single sensor but
representing that sensor data in different ways.
We assume aworld model, such as that used in Dream-
erV3 [13]. The world model learns the world transition dy-
namics and is used to more efficiently train the policy model
by predicting state-action-state transitions, effectively sepa-
rating the agent from the true environment. Although many
of the world model’s learned predictors are rarely used at
inference time, we find that the model’s surprise grows pro-
portionally with the intensity of injected noise. This rela-
tionship is shown in Figure 1 for two domains The trained
world model’s measure of Bayesian surprise [17] is the di-
vergence between the world model’s learned posterior and
prior of the next state:
KL

qϕ(zt |h t, xt)
pϕ(zt |h t)

(2)
This measure naturally provides a correlated signal for de-
tecting unexpected noise. When the model consistently reg-
isters unusually high surprise without corresponding struc-
ture in the environment, it may indicate that the observa-
tions are dominated by noise rather than meaningful dynam-
ics. Building on this hypothesis, we introduce a surprise-
guided rejection sampling method that mitigates corruption
in the world model’s predicted latent state while maintain-
ing anO(nlogn)computational cost. during inference
time.
Surprise-Guided Multi-Representation Rejection Sam-
pling for Confident Decision MakingWe investigate the
world model’s ability toadaptively switch representations
in an online failure setting, where sensor failures occur
without prior knowledge. In the multi-sensor setting, the
agent samples a set ofMhigh-dimensional sensory obser-
vations at each time step,
x∗ ={y (1)
t , y(2)
t , . . . , y(M)
t },
from which it forms a fused observation
xt =f enc(x∗),
wheref enc denotes the encoder or sensor-fusion module.x t
is then used to sample the latent statez t via the representa-
tion model (Eq. 1).
During evaluation, if any subset of sensory inputsy t ∈
x∗ exhibits abnormally high surprise, indicating a potential
corruption or failure, the model avoids relying on the full
fused observationx t. Instead, it samples a latent state pre-
dictionz (i)
t conditioned on a fused observationx (i)
t formed
by a subset of uncorrupted inputsx (i)
∗ ⊆x ∗. This selec-
tion is formulated as an optimization that chooses the input
subset minimizing the Bayesian surprise between the repre-
sentation model and the dynamics predictor (Eq 1):
arg min
x(i)
∗ ⊆x∗
KL
h
qϕ(z(i)
t |h t, x(i)
t )∥p ϕ(zt |h t)
i
.(3)
The resulting sampled latentz (i)
t serves as analternative
latent state representation, which is then used to select an
actiona t ∼π((z (i)
t , ht)).1
1Optionally, the optimization can be relaxed to respect a set of required
sensors (see Algorithm 2).
3
Policy
Latent State
Encoder
World Model
Rejected
Noisy
Accepted
Environment
Figure 2. Multi-Sensor Rejection Sampling. In practice, we utilize
Algorithm 2 to simulate this behavior in the agent.
Multi-Representation Dropout TrainingTo simulate
the removal of sensory inputs, we apply a mask-based sen-
sor dropout. Naturally, the absence of expected sensory
inputs induces increased surprise within the world model.
Therefore, to prepare the agent for dropout variation in its
sensors, we expose it to projections onto random subspaces
of the full representation space via random dropout of repre-
sentations—a form of state representation learning [7]. As
shown in Algorithm 1, this encourages the world model to
learn a latent distribution that remains robust even when
some components of the sensory inputs are missing. By ex-
periencing these partial views during training, we observe
(Figure 16 Appendix E.3) that the world model is still ca-
pable of inferring consistent and informative latent states
despite variability in the available representations.
5. Multiple Sensor Experiments
For our main results, we primarily focus on settings that
naturally involve multiple sensors, such as automated driv-
ing tasks. Unless stated otherwise, we use the default sen-
sors and reward functions provided by each environment for
each respective task.
EnvironmentsWe show the generalization of our pro-
posed method through experiments conducted primarily in
the following domains:
•Safety Gymnasium[18] is a benchmark suite designed
to evaluate the trade-off between performance and safety
in reinforcement learning, extending the traditional RL
paradigm by introducing environments where agents
must complete goal-oriented tasks while simultaneously
minimizing safety violations such as collisions or enter-
ing hazardous regions. The environments include a vari-
ety of robotic control and navigation tasks that simulate
real-world constraints, providing explicit cost signals as-
sociated with unsafe behaviors. Our experiments use the
default camera sensors given by the environment (see Ap-
pendix A for details). Safety Gymnasium and the Safe-
Dreamer [15] baseline assume that the training and eval-
uation environments are identical. In practice, this as-
sumption may not hold, and our experiments test this by
injecting out-of-distribution data..
•CARLA[6] is an open-source urban driving simulator. It
was developed as a free platform for autonomous driving
research. Alongside the core simulator code and APIs,
CARLA includes a library of custom-designed urban en-
vironments and digital assets (e.g., buildings, vehicles,
pedestrians) that are freely available for use. The simu-
lator supports flexible configuration of sensor suites, such
as RGB cameras, Bird Eye view, LiDAR, GPS, and colli-
sion detectors.
We list each utilized sensor in detail in Appendix A. In each
environment, we simulate sensor failures by injecting vari-
ous types of structured and unstructured out-of-distribution
noise into the sensor data. Examples include gaussian, oc-
clusion, glare, jitter, chromatic aberration (chrome), and la-
tency. We provide example visualizations of noises applied
to the CARLA Bird Eye View (BEV) sensor in 7. Addition-
ally, all noises are described in Appendix B.2. The agent is
never notified of any properties of the failure scenario. In
all experiments, there is always at least one sensor that is
unaffected.
Agent ModelsIn this setting, we focus our experiments
on the State-of-the-Art DreamerV3 world model [13]. For
each experiment, theBaseagent is a model trained nor-
mally. AnAugmentedagent is the base model trained on
a dataset augmented with Gaussian noise. TheRandom
Masked Encoder(RME) [27], is a technique that also em-
ploys masked based sensor dropout, however does not pro-
vide a means to decide which sensors should be masked
out. For the multi-sensor domain, our rejection sampling
technique is labeled asConfident Representation(as to
not be confused with single-sensor results), which consists
of agents equipped with the surprise mechanism, dropout
training, and multi-sensor selection technique described in
Section 4. For all experiments during inference time, we
deploy Algorithm 2, as our proposed multi-sensor selec-
tion algorithm, designed to run inO(nlogn)without par-
allel optimizations. Unless otherwise specified, each exper-
iment data point represents an accumulation of 15,000 steps
across multiple independent and identically distributed en-
vironments for a particular method within the given task and
noise scenario. We evaluate each method in a fully closed-
loop setting, where the agent’s actions directly influence
subsequent observations. For both Safety Gymnasium and
CARLA, we focus on the agent’s reward in all tasks. In ad-
dition, for the Safety Gymnasium domain, we also focus on
cost, an empirical safety score that the Safety Gymnasium
domain provides.
4
(a) PointGoal Average Score
 (b) PointButton Average Score
 (c) CarGoal Average Score
(d) PointGoal Score-Cost Ratio
 (e) PointButton Score-Cost Ratio
 (f) CarGoal Score-Cost Ratio
Figure 3. Performance (top) and Score-Cost ratio (bottom) across three Safety Gymnasium tasks. We display the Score-Cost ratio to
measure how safely the task can be accomplished with respect to the score. Each column corresponds to a noise type, with clean being the
nominal setting.
Carla: Stop Sign Task
Figure 4. Agent performance as the number of sensor failures (from 0-5 sensors) during the stop sign task. We observe that as the sensors
begin to become affected, we are able to reduce the effect that noise has on the main policy. For all 72 tested settings over the Stop Sign,
Right Turn, and Four Lane Driving Tasks, see Appendix 10.
ResultsFigure 3 illustrates our results on the Safety Gym-
nasium environment. Our Confident Representation method
is capable of consistently achieving the highest level of ro-
bustness on a variety of simulated sensor failures. It is also
able to capable of accomplishing said tasks with a competi-
tive score to cost ratio compared to other methods tested in
failure scenarios.
In CARLA, we can have up to 5 sensor failures. Results
are shown in Figure 4. We observe that our Confident Rep-
resentation method is capable of identifying failed sensors
to shut off during inference time. In comparison to other
methods, as sensors begin to fail, the agent is able to iden-
tify and use representations that provide meaningful signals
and achieve high rewards.
Also, despite not being trained on the exact Gaussian
noise that the Gaussian failure was trained on, Confident
5
Representation selection is capable of mirroring the perfor-
mance of the Augmented baseline in Figure 4. Finally, we
compare ourO(nlogn)sensor selection technique (Algo-
rithm 2 in Appendix E.4) to an exhaustive search of sensors
and show in Figure 9 that our technique can expect similar
performance despite being magnitudes lower in computa-
tional complexity.
6. Single Sensor Representation Selection
We next consider a setting where the agent samples a sin-
gle high-dimensional observationx ∗ ∈ Xat each decision
step from the environment, which may vary from a clean,
informative signal to a heavily corrupted input with limited
recoverable information. As with the previous multi-sensor
setting, the OOD noise resulting from potential sensor fail-
ure may cause the agent to take the wrong action, or may
have no effect on action choice.
To design an algorithm capable of improving robustness,
we first categorize the possible forms ofx∗ into three cases:
1.x ∗ =x t: The observation is clean, and the agent can
directly encode and rely on it for decision-making.
2.x ∗ =x light: The observation contains some noise, but
the underlying informative signal can still be recovered
or emphasized through selective processing or denois-
ing.
3.x ∗ =x heavy: The observation is dominated by noise to
the extent that the true signal is no longer recoverable
and should therefore be ignored.
Given the possible classes ofx ∗, we enable the agent to
switch between two modalities during inference: apredic-
tive mode, wherein the agent rejectsx heavy and the agent
instead relies on its internally predicted next state from the
world model, and aground-truth mode, wherein the agent
accepts the sampled observationx t or its denoised version
xlight =D(x ∗), for some choice of denoiserD(·). In
essence, when the agent determines that the input data is
sufficiently corrupted such that it jeopardizes action selec-
tion, it prefers its internal predictions of the world dynamics
over what it observes.
To decide if a observationx∗ should be rejected, a rejec-
tion score is assigned by a function,M(x ∗), and is rejected
if it reaches a thresholdτ. For our experiments we em-
ployM(·)as an expected reconstruction loss of the uncon-
ditioned (ht =h 0) observations: 1
|N|
P
i∈N
x(i)
t −ˆx(i)
t

whereˆxt =E pϕ(xt|zt,h0)[xt], and employD(·)to be the
predicted posterior representation generated by the world
model variational autoencoder:E pϕ(xt|zt,ht)[xt], as proof
of concept to identify abnormal sensory input. Intuitively,
M(·)andτare defined to indicate the presence of a failed
sensor, signaling that directly processingx ∗ would likely
lead to unpredictable behavior. The objective of our rejec-
tion sampling mechanism is to enable the agent to produce
predictable and conservative responsesin the presence of
unknown sensor failures. Since the purpose of rejection
sampling is to preserve the predicted latent state from cor-
ruption, downstream policies can then implement conserva-
tive strategies—such as pulling over—minimizing the risk
of unpredictable behavior occurring during their execution.
Aligning ContextDuring predictive mode, the agent re-
lies on its own imagined or simulated dynamics, which can
gradually drift from the true environment state. The agent
transitions from predictive mode to ground-truth mode
when an observation is accepted as beingx t orx n. When
the agent has been in predictive mode for a period, it be-
comes necessary to reconcile the incoming sensory input
with the agent’s internal context or trajectoryh t. Upon
re-entering ground-truth mode, the agent performs acon-
text reset—realigning its latent representation or belief state
to ensure consistency between the accepted observationx ∗
and its previously predicted trajectory. This step prevents
discontinuities in state estimation and allows the agent to
resume grounded interaction with the environment.
Conversely, when an observation is rejected after operat-
ing in ground-truth mode, the agent retains its most recent
valid internal context as a persistent residual. This residual
serves as a stabilizing prior, allowing the agent to maintain
coherent belief evolution during predictive inference until
a new, trustworthy observation is accepted. In effect, the
agent alternates between correcting drift upon acceptance
and preserving continuity upon rejection, ensuring robust
operation across varying observation qualities. We illustrate
this interleaving of switching between modes in Figure 5.
7. Single Sensor Experiments
We focus our experiments on two types of world models: a
V AE-based model (DreamerV3) [13] and a diffusion-based
model (Cosmos Predict-2.5) [24]. For unmodified compo-
nents of the world models, we use the exact hyperparam-
eters recommended in [13], [15], [24], and [8]. For all
other additional modifications, we list exact hyperparam-
eters used and hardware details in Appendix D.
In these experiments, the world model-based agent uses
a single sensor and only receives a single representation at
every time step. In the single representation setting, we con-
sider the effect that different combinations of noise, inten-
sity, and proportion have on an agent during the course of
an episode. To empirically test the behavior of our pro-
posed method, We empirically validate our results against
the original world model (Base), Median Filtering (Fil-
ter) [31], and Hybrid RSSM (HRSSM) [28], which aug-
ments the RSSM framework to capture task-relevant dy-
namics while suppressing noise. We setτto be 5 standard
deviations from the average reconstruction loss during tran-
sitions in the normal environment. Figure 6 shows results
6
Accept as 
(clean)
Step 1
Initial Check
?
Input: 
Step 2
Denoise
Step 3
Final Check
Accept as 
(light noise)
Denoise: 
?
Predictive
Mode
Ground Truth
Mode
Accept
Reset Context
Reject
Retain Context
Accept
Retain Context
Reject
Retain Context
Rejection Sampling
State Machine
Reject as 
(heavy noise)
Figure 5. Rejection sampling process for noise classification and
context state machine for the world model’s latent state.
from the Carla Four Lane task. Rejection Sampling con-
sistently achieves the highest scores across all tested noise
types, maintaining robustness as both the proportion and in-
tensity of noise increase. Unlike other methods, it does not
exhibit a decline toward lower negative scores under higher
noise levels. We find that across all methods, the perfor-
mance surfaces are generally skewed to the right, suggest-
ing that increasing the proportion of corrupted observations
has a stronger detrimental effect than increasing noise in-
tensity.
7.1. Cosmos World Model
To further verify that the proposed rejection-based filter-
ing mechanism generalizes beyond latent-state world mod-
els, we extend our study to the Cosmos Predict 2.5 world
model—a Diffusion-based video world model that per-
forms pixel-space prediction through large-scale diffusion
and spatio-temporal self-attention.
We experiment with utilizing theRejection Sampling
Table 1. Average PAI Quality score [35], between the base model
and our proposed Rejection Sampling technique. Separated by
noise type.
Aug Type Base Model Rejection Sampling Avg Diff Rel %
Chrome 0.774 0.808 0.034 3.13
Gaussian 0.767 0.810 0.043 5.00
Glare 0.726 0.809 0.083 11.98
Jitter 0.719 0.812 0.093 12.25
Occlusion 0.787 0.810 0.023 3.18
Overall 0.755 0.810 0.055 7.11
process displayed in Figure 5 in an alternative world model
setting. We utilize each of the noises discussed in Ap-
pendix B.2 at a proportion of 75% to distort input videos,
and monitor Cosmos-Predict 2.5’s generation quality. In
this setting, we apply our proposed Rejection Sampling
process on the Robot Pouring Task (See Appendix E.1
for prompt, visualization, and implementation details), and
compare with the base Cosmos generation procedure.
For comparison with the standard Cosmos generation
procedure, we monitor the PAI-Bench quality score [35]:
An overall summary of eight scores pertaining to quality,
consistency, and smoothness (Explicit descriptions can be
found in Appendix E.1.2). We defineM(x ∗)as the metric
score measuring reconstruction quality:
M(x∗) = 1
CHW
X
c,h,w
(xc,h,w
∗ −ˆxc,h,w
∗ )2
whereˆx∗ =f θ(x∗)is the immediate next frame generated
by the model from conditioning only on the previous frame
x∗, andC,H,Wdenotes the channel, height, and width
dimensions. We evaluate each of the lastNinput framesx ∗
by computing their corresponding rejection scoreM(x ∗)
(See Figure 11 for a visual aid). Similar to denoising meth-
ods found in unsupervised settings [19, 23, 37], we employ
Dσ(x∗)as a noise-and-denoise operator that: (1) encodes
reference framex ∗ to latent space, (2) corrupts the latent
with Gaussian noise at strengthσ, and (3) applies reverse
diffusion denoising for reconstruction. The reverse diffu-
sion process leverages the model’s learned Gaussian noise
characteristics to remove the corruption and recover the true
image. We report our findings in Table 1. We find that Re-
jection Sampling is capable of improving the relative PAI
quality score by roughly 7% overall when the input video
is corrupted. Additionally, we find that rejection sampling
brings all augmentation types to a similar improved perfor-
mance level (∼0.81), regardless of their initial degradation
severity.
8. Conclusion
We introduced a surprise-driven filtering framework that
leverages the world model’s internal uncertainty to selec-
7
(a) Chromatic Aberration corruption
 (b) Jitter corruption
(c) Glare corruption
 (d) Gaussian noise
Figure 6. Visualization of policy behavior in the CARLA four-lane environment under different visual corruptions, accounting for 192
settings. Each subfigure shows the methods’ potential to safeguard the agent from a specific perturbation type. For results on other tasks
see 8.
tively suppress unreliable sensory inputs. Our approach in-
troduces two variants of rejection sampling—multi-sensor
and single-representation—that enable world models to
remain stable and effective under diverse noisy, out-of-
distribution sensor failures. Empirical evaluations across
self-driving tasks in CARLA and Safety Gymnasium, as
well as across both diffusion-based and V AE-based world
models, demonstrate that our method achieves robust per-
formance without compromising adaptability. These results
highlight the potential of surprise-based mechanisms for
building world-model-based systems that maintain safety
and stability in the face of unknown failures.
8
References
[1] Karl Johan ˚Astr¨om. Optimal control of markov processes
with incomplete state information.Journal of Mathematical
Analysis and Applications, 10:174–205, 1965. 2
[2] Mogens Blanke, Michel Kinnaert, Jan Lunze, and Mar-
cel Staroswiecki.Diagnosis and Fault-Tolerant Control.
Springer, Berlin, Germany, 3rd edition, 2016. 2
[3] Jen-Yen Chang, Thomas Westfechtel, Takayuki Osa, and
Tatsuya Harada. Offline deep reinforcement learning for vi-
sual distractions via domain adversarial training.Transac-
tions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. 2
[4] Jie Chen and Ronald J. Patton.Robust Model-Based Fault
Diagnosis for Dynamic Systems. Kluwer Academic Publish-
ers, Boston, MA, 1999. 2
[5] Karl Cobbe, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John
Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to benchmark
reinforcement learning.CoRR, abs/1912.01588, 2019. 2
[6] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio
Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. CARLA: An open urban driving
simulator. InProceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on
Robot Learning, pages 1–16, 2017. 2, 4, 11
[7] Zeki Doruk Erden, Donia Gasmi, and Boi Faltings. Contin-
ual reinforcement learning via autoencoder-driven task and
new environment recognition, 2025. 2
[8] Dechen Gao, Shuangyu Cai, Hanchu Zhou, Hang Wang,
Iman Soltani, and Junshan Zhang. Cardreamer: Open-source
learning platform for world model based autonomous driv-
ing.IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pages 1–1, 2024. 6
[9] Bram Grooten, Tristan Tomilin, Gautham Vasan, Matthew E
Taylor, A Rupam Mahmood, Meng Fang, Mykola Pech-
enizkiy, and Decebal Constantin Mocanu. MaDi: Learn-
ing to Mask Distractions for Generalization in Visual Deep
Reinforcement Learning.The 23rd International Confer-
ence on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AA-
MAS), 2024. URL:https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.
15339. 2
[10] David Ha and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models
facilitate policy evolution. InAdvances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 31, pages 2451–2463. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2018.https://worldmodels.github.
io. 2
[11] David Ha and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. World mod-
els, 2018. Interactive version of the article at
https://worldmodels.github.io. 2
[12] Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent ca-
pabilities. InProceedings of the International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. Originally pub-
lished as arXiv:2109.06780. 16
[13] Danijar Hafner, Julian Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, et al. Mastering
diverse control tasks through world models.Nature, 640:
647–653, 2025. 2, 3, 4, 6, 15
[14] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition, 2015. 18
[15] Weidong Huang, Jiaming Ji, Borong Zhang, Chunhe Xia,
and Yaodong Yang. Safedreamer: Safe reinforcement learn-
ing with world models. InThe Twelfth International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2024. 4, 6
[16] Miles Hutson, Isaac Kauvar, and Nick Haber. Policy-shaped
prediction: avoiding distractions in model-based reinforce-
ment learning. InAdvances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pages 13124–13148. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2024. 2
[17] Laurent Itti and Pierre Baldi. Bayesian surprise attracts hu-
man attention. InAdvances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems. MIT Press, 2005. 3
[18] Jiaming Ji, Borong Zhang, Jiayi Zhou, Xuehai Pan, Wei-
dong Huang, Ruiyang Sun, Yiran Geng, Yifan Zhong, Josef
Dai, and Yaodong Yang. Safety gymnasium: A unified safe
reinforcement learning benchmark. InThirty-seventh Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
and Benchmarks Track, 2023. 2, 4, 11, 13
[19] Minjong Lee and Dongwoo Kim. Robust evaluation of
diffusion-based adversarial purification. In2023 IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages
134–144, 2023. 7
[20] Daoliang Li, Ying Wang, Jinxing Wang, Cong Wang, and
Yanqing Duan. Recent advances in sensor fault diagnosis:
A review.Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 309:111990,
2020. 2
[21] Guan-Horng Liu, Avinash Siravuru, Sai Prabhakar, Manuela
Veloso, and George Kantor. Learning end-to-end multimodal
sensor policies for autonomous navigation. InProceedings
of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning, pages 249–
261. PMLR, 2017. 2
[22] Robert M ¨uller, Steffen Illium, Thomy Phan, Tom Haider,
and Claudia Linnhoff-Popien. Towards anomaly detection
in reinforcement learning. InProceedings of the 21st In-
ternational Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multia-
gent Systems, page 1799–1803, Richland, SC, 2022. Inter-
national Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems. 2
[23] Weili Nie, Brandon Guo, Yujia Huang, Chaowei Xiao, Arash
Vahdat, and Anima Anandkumar. Diffusion models for ad-
versarial purification, 2022. 7
[24] NVIDIA, :, Arslan Ali, Junjie Bai, Maciej Bala, Yogesh
Balaji, Aaron Blakeman, Tiffany Cai, Jiaxin Cao, Tianshi
Cao, Elizabeth Cha, Yu-Wei Chao, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay,
Mike Chen, Yongxin Chen, Yu Chen, Shuai Cheng, Yin Cui,
Jenna Diamond, Yifan Ding, Jiaojiao Fan, Linxi Fan, Liang
Feng, Francesco Ferroni, Sanja Fidler, Xiao Fu, Ruiyuan
Gao, Yunhao Ge, Jinwei Gu, Aryaman Gupta, Siddharth
Gururani, Imad El Hanafi, Ali Hassani, Zekun Hao, Ja-
cob Huffman, Joel Jang, Pooya Jannaty, Jan Kautz, Grace
Lam, Xuan Li, Zhaoshuo Li, Maosheng Liao, Chen-Hsuan
Lin, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yen-Chen Lin, Huan Ling, Ming-Yu
Liu, Xian Liu, Yifan Lu, Alice Luo, Qianli Ma, Hanzi
Mao, Kaichun Mo, Seungjun Nah, Yashraj Narang, Abhijeet
Panaskar, Lindsey Pavao, Trung Pham, Morteza Ramezanali,
Fitsum Reda, Scott Reed, Xuanchi Ren, Haonan Shao, Yue
Shen, Stella Shi, Shuran Song, Bartosz Stefaniak, Shangkun
Sun, Shitao Tang, Sameena Tasmeen, Lyne Tchapmi, Wei-
Cheng Tseng, Jibin Varghese, Andrew Z. Wang, Hao Wang,
Haoxiang Wang, Heng Wang, Ting-Chun Wang, Fangyin
Wei, Jiashu Xu, Dinghao Yang, Xiaodong Yang, Haotian
Ye, Seonghyeon Ye, Xiaohui Zeng, Jing Zhang, Qinsheng
9
Zhang, Kaiwen Zheng, Andrew Zhu, and Yuke Zhu. World
simulation with video foundation models for physical ai,
2025. 2, 6
[25] Amartya Sanyal, Yaxi Hu, Yaodong Yu, Yian Ma, Yixin
Wang, and Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf. Accuracy on the wrong
line: On the pitfalls of noisy data for OOD generalisation. In
ICML 2024 Next Generation of AI Safety Workshop, 2024. 2
[26] Younggyo Seo, Danijar Hafner, Hao Liu, Fangchen Liu,
Stephen James, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Masked
world models for visual control, 2023. 2
[27] Skand Skand, Bikram Pandit, Chanho Kim, Li Fuxin, and
Stefan Lee. Simple masked training strategies yield control
policies that are robust to sensor failure. In8th Annual Con-
ference on Robot Learning, 2024. 2, 4
[28] Ruixiang Sun, Hongyu Zang, Xin Li, and Riashat Islam.
Learning latent dynamic robust representations for world
models. InICML, 2024. 2, 6
[29] The MathWorks, Inc. What is fault detection, isolation, and
recovery (fdir)?https://www.mathworks.com/
discovery/fdir.html, 2025. Accessed: 2025-08-12.
2
[30] Frederik Tr ¨auble, Andrea Dittadi, Manuel Wuthrich, Felix
Widmaier, Peter Vincent Gehler, Ole Winther, Francesco Lo-
catello, Olivier Bachem, Bernhard Sch ¨olkopf, and Stefan
Bauer. The role of pretrained representations for the OOD
generalization of RL agents. InInternational Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022. 2
[31] Zaitian Wang, Pengfei Wang, Kunpeng Liu, Pengyang
Wang, Yanjie Fu, Chang-Tien Lu, Charu C. Aggarwal, Jian
Pei, and Yuanchun Zhou. A comprehensive survey on data
augmentation, 2024. 2, 6
[32] Tao Yu, Zhizheng Zhang, Cuiling Lan, Yan Lu, and Zhibo
Chen. Mask-based latent reconstruction for reinforcement
learning. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 2022. 2
[33] Syed Waqas Zamir, Aditya Arora, Salman Khan, Mu-
nawar Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
Restormer: Efficient transformer for high-resolution image
restoration. InCVPR, 2022. 18
[34] Amy Zhang, Rowan Thomas McAllister, Roberto Calandra,
Yarin Gal, and Sergey Levine. Learning invariant repre-
sentations for reinforcement learning without reconstruction.
InInternational Conference on Learning Representations,
2021. 2
[35] Fengzhe Zhou, Jiannan Huang, Jialuo Li, and Humphrey Shi.
Physical ai bench: A comprehensive benchmark for physical
ai generation and understanding, 2025. 7, 16
[36] Geigh Zollicoffer, Kenneth Eaton, Jonathan C Balloch, Julia
Kim, Wei Zhou, Robert Wright, and Mark Riedl. Novelty
detection in reinforcement learning with world models. In
Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, 2025. 2
[37] Geigh Zollicoffer, Minh N. Vu, Ben Nebgen, Juan Castorena,
Boian Alexandrov, and Manish Bhattarai. Lorid: Low-rank
iterative diffusion for adversarial purification.Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 39(21):
23081–23089, 2025. 7
10
A. Sensors
CARLA [6]
•Lidar: Captures a 3D point cloud of the surrounding en-
vironment.
•Camera: Provides a forward-facing RGB view from the
vehicle.
•Bird’s-Eye View (BEV) Raw: Displays the roadmap and
surrounding vehicles from a top-down perspective.
•Collision: Detects collisions with objects in the environ-
ment.
•Bird’s-Eye View with Traffic Signals: Renders traffic
lights and signs directly on the BEV .
•Bird’s-Eye View with Waypoints: Renders only waypoints
on the BEV (GPS setting).
•Bird’s-Eye View Full: Renders all available semantic in-
formation on the BEV .
Safety Gymnasium [18]
•Bird Eye View: A view of the agent and the entire map
from above.
•Front Vehicle View: The immediate front view of the
agent.
•Dash Camera View: The immediate front view of the
agent from the dash cam perspective.
B. CARLA Noise Corruption and Sensor
Degradation
B.1. Environment and Representations
In CARLA [6], an open-source urban driving simulator, the
agent is equipped with a diverse sensor suite comprising
seven modalities (see A). We evaluate performance on three
representative scenarios—Stop Sign, Right Turn, and Four
Lane Driving—which test the agent’s ability to perceive,
plan, and act under different traffic configurations.
B.2. Robustness under Visual Corruptions
We evaluate the robustness of the driving agent in the
CARLA simulator by subjecting input images to five types
of visual corruptions:
• Chromatic Aberration: introduces small spatial shifts be-
tween RGB channels, producing color fringing and edge
distortions similar to lens dispersion.
• Gaussian Noise: adds pixel-level random variations,
modeling low-light sensor interference.
• Glare: causes extreme overexposure that whitens the
whole frame, erasing most visual information.
• Jitter: applies random shifts in contrast or brightness,
simulating unstable or high-noise sensor conditions.
• Occlusion: masks random regions of the frame, simulat-
ing partial blockage of the camera view.
The goal is to test how well the agent can still perform
its task under degraded visual inputs. Quantitatively, we
plot 3D surface graphs of the task performance metric as a
function of corruption intensity and proportion. Each sur-
face corresponds to one CARLA task—Stop Sign, Right
Turn, and Four-Lane Driving—and compares four meth-
ods: the baseline world-model agent, Median Filtering, our
proposed Rejection Sampling, and HRSSM. For all tasks
shown in Figure 8, our Rejection Sampling maintains a
much smoother and higher performance surface, indicating
stable behavior even under severe sensor degradation. This
trend demonstrates that the proposed Filter not only delays
the onset of failure but also preserves task continuity across
extreme perturbations, achieving consistently superior ro-
bustness and reliability in all CARLA environments.
B.3. Efficiency of Surprise-Guided Filter
Figure 9 illustrates the efficiency of our surprise-guided
filtering approach by comparing theO(nlogn)sensor-
selection strategy against the exhaustive2 N subset search
across the three CARLA tasks—Right Turn, Four-Lane,
and Stop Sign—under four corruption types: Gaussian,
Glare, Jitter, and Lag. The specific perturbations applied
to the camera view are defined as follows:
• Gaussian Noise: adds pixel-level random variations,
modeling low-light sensor interference.
• Glare: causes extreme overexposure that whitens the
whole frame, erasing most visual information.
• Jitter: applies random shifts in contrast or brightness,
simulating unstable or high-noise sensor conditions.
• Latency (Lag): causes the observation to lag behind the
true state by reusing stale frames for several steps, emu-
lating delayed or frozen sensor updates.
The evaluation spans a wide range of augmentation in-
tensities to test how each method scales as visual degrada-
tion increases. For Gaussian Noise and Jitter, both methods
display non-monotonic trends: mild noise can be mitigated
by masking high-surprise views, while stronger perturba-
tions introduce sharp drops, particularly in the Four-Lane
task at intensity level 4. Glare yields more stable perfor-
mance because overexposed channels are consistently iden-
tified and suppressed. Lag produces a near-monotonic de-
cline across all tasks due to its strong disruption of temporal
coherence. Crucially, the greenO(nlogn)curves typically
track the red2 N curves closely, despite the exponential cost
associated with the brute-force method. This demonstrates
that the surprise-guided filter attains robustness compara-
ble to exhaustive subset evaluation at only a fraction of the
computational burden. The results confirm that the learned
surprise signal provides a reliable ranking over sensor util-
ity, making combinatorial search unnecessary and enabling
practical, scalable deployment in multi-sensor RL settings.
11
(a) Chrome
 (b) Gaussian
 (c) Glare
 (d) Jitter
 (e) Occlusion
Figure 7. Visual comparison of the clean and corrupted from the CARLA BEV perspective. The left frame is the corrupted observation,
and the right frame is the ground truth observation.
(a) Four-Lane Driving
(b) Right Turn
(c) Stop Sign
Figure 8. Qualitative results across three CARLA tasks under five corruption types: Chrome, Gaussian, Glare, Jitter, and Occlusion.
B.4. Sensor Failure Analysis
Figure 10 provides a comprehensive breakdown of how in-
creasing sensor failures affect agent performance across all
three CARLA tasks—Right Turn, Stop Sign, and Four-Lane
Driving—under four primary corruption types detailed in
Section B.3: Gaussian Noise, Glare, Jitter, and Latency.
Each subfigure in Figure 10 plots episodic score as a
function of the number of failed sensors, comparing four
methods: the Baseline world-model agent, the Augmented
agent trained with Gaussian noise, the RME masked-
encoder agent, and our Confident Representation approach.
Across all tasks and corruption types, Baseline exhibits the
steepest decline, often collapsing to near-zero or negative
scores as failures accumulate. RME reduces variance but re-
mains sensitive to structured failures such as Glare and La-
tency. Augmented improves stability under moderate Gaus-
sian noise, but still degrades noticeably when failures inten-
sify.
In contrast, Confident Representation consistently main-
tains the highest performance curve, showing only mild
degradation even with multiple failed sensors. Its advantage
is particularly notable under Glare and Jitter, where cor-
rupted visual channels severely mislead other methods. Un-
der Latency, all agents experience some decline, yet Confi-
dent Representation preserves stable, positive performance
while avoiding the abrupt failures observed in Baseline and
RME.
Overall, these results show that surprise-guided repre-
sentation selection remains effective across diverse CARLA
configurations, enabling the agent to identify corrupted
views, suppress unreliable inputs, and sustain robust con-
trol even as sensor failures accumulate.
12
(a) Right Turn
(b) Four Lane Driving
(c) Stop Sign
Figure 9. Comparison across three tasks under different noise conditions. We compare the2 N brute force variant against our proposed
O(nlogn)Algorithm variant 2.
C. Safety Gymnasium Experiments
In the Safety Gymnasium domain [18], the agent’s goal
is to navigate safely to objectives in an environment with
obstacles. We provide three overlapping camera views as
described in Section A, which capture similar scene con-
tent from complementary perspectives. We evaluate per-
formance on three tasks: PointGoal1, where a point-mass
agent must reach a goal location while avoiding hazards;
PointButton1, where a point-mass must press buttons scat-
tered in the map while avoiding obstacles, and CarGoal1,
where a car-like agent must reach a goal on a road with ob-
stacles. Each task also penalizes unsafe collisions with a
cost.
Figure 3 in the main text summarizes performance un-
der four visual corruption types—Gaussian, Jitter, Glare,
and Occlusion—applied independently to each of the three
camera views. Since these views are partially redundant,
corruption in a single view does not immediately prevent
task completion but can mislead the policy when the cor-
rupted view dominates the latent inference. The surprise-
guided filter addresses this by downweighting or suppress-
ing views whose inferred representations deviate strongly
from the world model’s predictive prior. As shown in the
figure, this leads to consistent improvements in both per-
formance and the Score–Cost ratio across all Safety Gym-
nasium tasks. In particular, the method effectively han-
dles Glare and Occlusion, where one view becomes unreli-
able but the remaining views still convey meaningful struc-
ture. The resulting gains in safety and stability demonstrate
that even in environments with overlapping visual inputs,
surprise-guided representation selection provides measur-
able robustness against view-specific corruptions.
D. Hardware Details and Hyperparameters
CrafterAll experiments can be reproduced on a system
equipped with two NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 GPUs with
8 GB VRAM each to handle environment complexity, an
AMD Ryzen 5 5600X 6-core processor, and at least 500 MB
of storage for files (excluding training data, which depends
on the environment and model hyperparameters).
13
(a) Right Turn
(b) Stop Sign
(c) Four-Lane Driving
Figure 10. Agent performance as sensor failures increase.
14
Name Symbol Value
General
Replay capacity — 5×106
Batch size B 16
Batch length T 64
Activation — RMSNorm + SiLU
Learning rate — 4×10−5
Gradient clipping — AGC(0.3)
Optimizer — LaProp(ϵ= 10−20)
World Model
Reconstruction loss scaleβpred 1
Dynamics loss scale βdyn 1
Representation loss scaleβrep 0.1
Latent unimix — 1%
Free nats — 1
Actor Critic
Imagination horizon H 15
Discount horizon 1/(1−γ) 333
Return lambda λ 0.95
Critic loss scale βval 1
Critic replay loss scale βrepval 0.3
Critic EMA regularizer — 1
Critic EMA decay — 0.98
Actor loss scale βpol 1
Actor entropy regularizerη 3×10−4
Actor unimix — 1%
Actor RetNorm scale S Per(R,95)−Per(R,5)
Actor RetNorm limit L 1
Actor RetNorm decay — 0.99
Table 2. Hyperparameters of the Dreamerv3 model. We use the
exact same parameters as discussed in [13].
CARLA and Safety GymnasiumAll reported experi-
ments related to Safety-Gymnasium and CARLA domains
can be conducted on a workstation equipped with an
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU (24 GB VRAM), an
AMD Ryzen 9 7950X (16-core, 32-thread) CPU, 128 GB
DDR5 RAM, and running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS (CUDA 12.4).
CosmosAll reported experiments relating to the Cosmos
world model can be conducted on a workstation equipped
with dual Intel Xeon 6737P CPUs (64 cores total), 2.0 TiB
of DDR5 system memory, a NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 uti-
lizing driver version 580.82.07 (CUDA 13.0).
E. Further Results
E.1. Cosmos World Model
To further verify that the proposed rejection-based filtering
mechanism generalizes beyond latent-state world models,
we abstract the process of Figure 5 and extend our study to
the Cosmos world model—a Diffusion-based video world
model that performs pixel-space prediction through large-
scale diffusion and spatio-temporal self-attention. Unlike
the DreamerV3 architecture used in our main experiments,
which relies on a Variational Autoencoder with explicit la-
tent variables and KL-based surprise, Cosmos models dy-
namics directly in the image domain via autoregressive
diffusion-based video prediction. This enables high-fidelity
frame synthesis but also makes it highly sensitive to corrup-
tion in its first-frame conditioning.
We evaluate Cosmos on the robot pouring video, where
a robotic manipulator pours liquid between jars on a table-
top. In our experiments, 75% of the input video is ran-
domly perturbed with one of the noises discussed in B.2.
Because Cosmos conditions its rollout on the last N frames
of the input video, this corruption propagates through im-
mediate subsequent predictions, as shown in the top row
of Figure 11. After enabling our rejection mechanism, the
system detects the corrupted immediate next frame as high-
surprise and instead relies on internally predicted latent tra-
jectories to reconstruct the scene. The bottom row shows
markedly improved geometry and color fidelity around the
robot arm and jars, indicating a safer frame to accept,
demonstrating that selective rejection of corrupted condi-
tioning frames can effectively suppress artifact propagation
even in Transformer-based video world models.
E.1.1. Video Prompt: Robotic Arm Pouring Sequence
Scene Description
A robotic arm, primarily white with black joints and
cables, is shown in a clean, modern indoor setting
with a white tabletop. The arm, equipped with a
gripper holding a small, light green pitcher, is po-
sitioned above a clear glass containing a reddish-
brown liquid and a spoon. The robotic arm is in
the process of pouring a transparent liquid into the
glass. To the left of the pitcher, there is an open
jar with a similar reddish-brown substance visible
through its transparent body. In the background, a
vase with white flowers and a brown couch are par-
tially visible, adding to the contemporary ambiance.
The lighting is bright, casting soft shadows on the
table. The robotic arm’s movements are smooth and
controlled, demonstrating precision in its task. As
the video progresses, the robotic arm completes the
pour, leaving the glass half-filled with the reddish-
brown liquid. The jar remains untouched throughout
the sequence, and the spoon inside the glass remains
stationary. The other robotic arm on the right side
also stays stationary throughout the video. The final
frame captures the robotic arm with the pitcher fin-
ishing the pour, with the glass now filled to a higher
level, while the pitcher is slightly tilted but still held
securely by the gripper.
15
(a) Chromatic Aberration Frame 1
 (b) Chromatic Aberration Frame 2
(c) Clean Observation Frame 1
 (d) Clean Observation Frame 2
Figure 11. First-frame conditioning comparison under the Cos-
mos model: the first column shows the input frame, and the sec-
ond column shows the corresponding generated frame that was
conditioned by the first frame. We utilize the Mean Squared error
between two frames as our rejection scoreM(x ∗).
E.1.2. Cosmos Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate the denoised and base Cosmos generations
using metrics from the PAI-Bench [35], a comprehensive
benchmark for assessing physical-world video generation
and prediction quality. Following the official protocol, we
use the last frame of the ground truth clean input video as
the reference image to compute the image-to-video (i2v) fi-
delity scores. The metrics are described as follows:
•Aesthetic Quality.Measures the visual appeal and per-
ceptual realism of the generated video, including compo-
sition, color balance, and absence of artefacts.
•Background Consistency.Evaluates the temporal sta-
bility of background regions across frames—high scores
indicate minimal flicker or spatial drift.
•Imaging Quality.Quantifies camera-like clarity, sharp-
ness, and signal-to-noise ratio of the generated video
frames.
•Motion Smoothness.Assesses the temporal coherence
of motion; low values indicate jitter or unnatural frame
transitions.
•Overall Consistency.Aggregates spatial and temporal
coherence into a single holistic quality measure of the en-
tire video.
•Subject Consistency.Examines whether the primary ob-
ject or agent remains stable in shape, color, and identity
over time.
•i2v Background.Image-to-video fidelity for background
regions, comparing each frame to the last frame of the
input video.
•i2v Subject.Image-to-video fidelity for the subject
region, capturing how faithfully the generated subject
matches the reference frame.
Hidden
Enemy
Deceptive
Enemy
Novel
Colors
0
1
2
3
4
5
6Mean Score
Baseline Isolation Only Isolation + Recursive Masking
Figure 12. Crafter: Baseline vs Confident Representation Perfor-
mance. Scores improve as the agent utilizes masking in Algorithm
2 to adapt to different types of novelties.
Higher scores across these dimensions indicate
smoother, more coherent, and visually faithful video
synthesis. In our experiments shown in Table 1, the
proposed rejection sampling consistently improves both the
i2v metrics and overall perceptual quality compared to the
baseline generations.
E.2. Semantic Noise Experiments
Although outside the main scope of our work, we briefly
consider experimentation with semantic noise.
We choose the Crafter domain [12] due to its utility in
embedding abstract skins and unknown colors during infer-
ence time, primarily meant to distract the agent.
(a) Hidden Enemy
 (b) Deceptive Enemy
 (c) Novel Colors
Figure 13. Qualitative visualization of agents’ behavior in dif-
ferent semantic novelty scenarios. Figure 13a shows theHidden
Enemyscenario, where a yellow blob attacks the agent like zom-
bies despite appearing harmless on the danger map. Figure 13b
shows theDeceptive Enemyscenario, where certain cows are re-
programmed to behave like zombies. Figure 13c shows theNovel
Colors, in which all grass blocks turn bright yellow, creating a
purely visual domain shift.
To furnish the agent with a rich state representation, we
provide and train with six complementary observation chan-
nels (visualizations provided in Figure 14):
16
•Bird’s Eye View: A top-down, default view of the Crafter
gameplay centered on the agent and a few blocks around
it.
•Grayscale: A grayscale version of Bird’s Eye View.
•Semantic View: A top-down view of the entire game map
showing object locations; built-in Crafter.
•Danger Heatmap: Shows sources of danger (zombies,
skeletons, lava) as red with Gaussian decay; player rep-
resented with a green dot.
•Health Trail: Records agent health at its location through
pixel intensity, widened to a 3x3 region to improve train-
ing.
•Proximity Grid: A 3x3 grid representing the eight car-
dinal directions around the agent; intensities reflect the
presence of objects cumulatively, scaled up to 64x64 for
training.
(a) Bird’s Eye View
 (b) Grayscale
 (c) Semantic View
(d) Danger Heatmap
 (e) Health Trail
 (f) Proximity Grid
Figure 14. Six different representations of the Crafter environ-
ment, capturing a diverse range of data, were used to train the
agent.
Unlike Safety Gymnasium and CARLA, the Crafter exper-
iments use a single sensor (top down local view) but with
multiple representations (grayscale, danger heatmap, prox-
imity heatmap, etc.).
We first train the world model in the Crafter domain with
Algorithm 1 to prepare for missing representations. To sim-
ulate unknown semantic noise, we inject unfamiliar con-
texts (invisible enemies, different enemy skins, visual color
shifts) during inference time. In this setting, we create al-
terations that have the potential to conditionally affect mul-
tiple representations at once rather than independently (see
Table 15 for a brief summary of expected representations
affected given the semantic noise introduced).
We monitor the performance of a (1) Base agent, (2) an
agent that only implements Step 1Isolation(an agent only
selects a single representation) and (3) an agent that imple-
Hidden
Deceptive
Colors
BEV
Gray
Sem
Dng
HT
ProxNovelty Focus
Low
Low
High
Figure 15. Representation modalities affected by each novelty
type. Large circles indicate representations directly modified by
the novelty, while small circles indicate representations indirectly
affected through downstream effects. The Focus column indicates
whether the novelty’s impact is concentrated (High) or distributed
across multiple modalities (Low).
ments Step 1 and Step 3Recursive Masking(an agent that
recursively masks the observations in order of surprise). We
include hardware details in Appendix D.
We report our findings in Figure 13. We hypothesize
that the level of depth generally affects the performance of
the agent, depending on how focused the semantic noise is
on a subset of representations. Recursive masking appears
to improve the performance on changes that are expected
to focus on a single representation, such as color based al-
terations that primarily affect the image representation of
the state (Novel Colors). Whereas representation isolation
tends to be more useful towards returning the agent towards
a predictable policy when many of the representations are
affected (Hidden Enemy, Deceptive Enemy, Invert Health).
Although we primarily test with out-of-distribution sensor
failures, we find agents equipped with Algorithm 2 appear
to show some potential towards exhibiting improved stabil-
ity through automated selection of representations in this
setting, potentially opening avenues for future research.
E.3. Ablations
E.3.1. Representation Dropout Training
We further conduct an ablation study shown as Figure 16 to
evaluate the effect of representation-dropout training on the
stability and robustness of the world model. In this setting,
a random subset of input modalities or encoded features is
masked during each training step, encouraging the model to
infer consistent latent dynamics even under partial observa-
tions.
Across all six tasks— PointGoal2, CarGoal1, PointBut-
ton1, Four-Lane Driving, Right Turn, and Stop Sign —we
observe that the dropout-trained agents achieve comparable
or slightly higher final scores than normal training while ex-
hibiting smoother and more stable learning dynamics. Al-
though the early stages of training progress more slowly due
to random masking, the representation-dropout models con-
verge to similar or better performance with noticeably re-
17
duced variance. This demonstrates that exposing the world
model to incomplete or corrupted representations during
training improves its ability to maintain coherent latent dy-
namics under missing-sensor or noisy conditions. The re-
sults validate that representation dropout enhances general-
ization and forms the foundation for the robust filtering and
rejection mechanisms used in later experiments.
E.3.2. Alternative Rejection ScoresM(x ∗)
We test additional choices ofM(x∗)that a user may provide
on the Carla Four Lane Task (Denoising is still determined
byD(x ∗)used in the main results):
• Surprise: To decide whether to enter predictive mode, we
experiment with utilizing the Bayesian surprise measure
discussed in Eq 2.
• Resnet-18 [14]: To decide whether to enter predictive
mode, we train a Binary Resnet-18 classifier on a syn-
thetic dataset of observations (200,000) with and without
Gaussian noise, the goal of the classifier is to reject or
accept the observation given to the agent.
We report our results across two levels of noiseproportion
in Table 3.
MethodGaussian Chromatic Jitter Glare Occlusion
Res-18. (.75) 571.9±223.6−188.4±359.9−466.1±474.7−578.1±633.9483.5±285.9
Surp. (.75) 241.7±287.7 105.5±191.3 71.7±194.9 100.4±130.7 275.6±332.8
Res-18. (.875) 391.2±191.4−439.1±421.7−1237.0±638.3−717.2±622.4228.6±199.5
Surp. (.875) 164.1±259.1−18.14±250.139.18±104.38 55.1±96.93 257.5±281.4
Table 3. Comparison of surprise and trained ResNet-18 rejectors
across five noise types with different proportions (.75 and .875).
E.3.3. Alternative Denoising MethodsD(x ∗)
We test additional choices ofD(x∗)that a user may provide
on the Carla Four Lane Task (Acceptance is still determined
byM(x ∗)used in the main results):
• Prior Interpolation: We experiment with a linear interpo-
lation between the world model’s expected observation
and the current observation.
• Restormer [33]: We leverage an off-the-shelf denoiser
with a transformer architecture.
We report our results across two levels of noiseintensityin
Table 4.
MethodGaussian Chromatic Jitter Glare Occclusion
Interp (.625) 316.7±256.1 228.2±194.6 265.3±295.0 466.4±242.9 334.8±163.0
Restormer (.625) 262.7±221.1 180.1±177.3 196.1±170.1 308.8±211.7 305.7±185.4
Interp (.75) 258.3±288.6 205.6±273.4 183.8±401.4 448.2±274.3 255.9±189.9
Restormer (.75) 237.0±299.1 144.7±218.4 186.9±193.3 256.6±217.4 215.4±185.4
Table 4. Comparison of Interpolation and Restormer denoising
methods across five noises types with different intensities (.625
and .75).
E.4. Additional Algorithms
Figure 16. We compare the original world model training in Safety
Gymnasium and Carla Domains to the representation dropout
training.
18
Algorithm 1:Random Multi-Representation
Dropout Training
Input:Data dictionaryDwith image keysK, mask valuem
Output:Masked data dictionaryD ′
Step 1: Select available images;
K′ ← {k∈K:k∈ D};
n← |K′|;
ifn= 0then
returnD
Step 2: Sample images to mask each step;
For each batchband timestept:;
Drawu b,t ∼Uniform{0, . . . , n−1};
Step 3: Assign random rankings to images;
For each(b, t):;
Draw random valuesr b,t,1, . . . , rb,t,n;
Compute rankingsπ b,t by sorting these values;
Step 4: Construct masking matrix;
For each(b, t, i):;
Setmask[b, t, i]←1ifπ b,t(i)< ub,t, else0;
Step 5: Apply masking;
For eachk i ∈K ′:;
D′[ki][b, t]←
(
m,if mask[b, t, i] = 1
D[ki][b, t],otherwise ;
returnD ′;
Algorithm 2:O(nlogn)Surprise-Guided Repre-
sentation Selection
Input:Observation dictionaryobs t, sensor keysK, world modelWM,
prev statez t−1, prev actiona t−1, Optional DepthD
Output:Surprise valuesS, latentsZ
Step 1: Compute surprise for each sensor individually;
foreachk∈Kdo
Initialize empty observation:;
obst′ ←0;
Isolate observation sensor:;
obsk
t′ ←obs k
t ;
Encode:e t ←Encoder(obs t′);
Predict posterior distribution:;
Pϕ(zk
t |et, ht)←WM(z t−1, at−1, et);
Surprise:;
Sk ←KL
h
Pϕ(zk
t |et, ht)∥P ϕ(zk
t |ht)
i
;
AppendS k toSandz k
t ∼P ϕ(zk
t |et, ht)toZ;
Step 2: Sort sensors by decreasing surprise;
π←argsort
 
[Sk]k∈K

;
Step 3: Iteratively mask sensors in sorted order;
obst′ ←obs t;
fori←1tomin(|K|, D)do
Mask sensorπ i:;
obs
πi
t′ ←0;
Encode:e t ←Encoder(obs t′);
Predict posterior distribution:;
Pϕ(zk
t |et, ht)←WM(z t−1, at−1, et);
Surprise:;
Sk ←KL
h
Pϕ(zk
t |et, ht)∥P ϕ(zk
t |ht)
i
;
AppendS k toSandz k
t ∼P ϕ(zk
t |et, ht)toZ;
Z∗ ←arg minZ S(Z)
returnZ ∗
19