ADAPTIVE-λSISS in MACHINE UNLEARNING for
DDPM & VAE
M. Parsa Dini
mp.dini@ee.sharif.edu
Human Jafari
houman.jafari627@sharif.edu
Sajjad Amini
s_amini@sharif.edu
M. Mahdi Mojahedian
mojahedian@sharif.edu
December 2, 2025
Abstract
Machine Unlearning (MU)iscriticalforlargegenerativemodels, suchasVAEs[1]andDDPMs[4],
to enforce theright to be forgottenand ensure safe content generation without expensive retraining. Ex-
isting methods, like theStatic-λSISS framework[6] for Diffusion Models, rely on a fixed data mixing
parameterλ, which is suboptimal as the necessary unlearning rate varies dynamically across samples and
training stages.
We introduceADAPTIVE-λSISS, a novel approach that transforms the mixing parameterλfrom
a fixed constant into alatent variablewhose optimal value is dynamically inferred at each unlearning
step. We leverage aVariational Inference-basedobjective[2], employing a small neural network to
learn an adaptive posterior distributionqϕ(λ). This network conditions on context features derived from
the SISS loss components, enabling simultaneous and robust optimization of the diffusion model and the
λ-inference mechanism.
We also explore the application of this adaptive concept to score-function-based unlearning, proposing
a multi-class extension for theScore Forgetting Distillation (SFD) framework[7]. Empirical results
on an augmented MNIST dataset demonstrate thatADAPTIVE-λSISSsignificantly improves over
the original SISS, yielding superior removal of forgotten content while better maintaining the generative
quality on the retain set.
Furthermore, we propose novel extensions to this unlearning paradigm. First, we explore a unified
unlearning objective that leverages the Score Forgetting Distillation (SFD) framework’s data-free effi-
ciency and the SISS framework’s direct gradient control, creating a hybrid approach that exploits the
strengths of both. Second, to enhance the robustness and fine-grained control of the unlearning process,
we introduce a Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework that learns an optimal, sequential unlearning
policy, treating the unlearning operation as an action in a state space defined by the model’s current
memory of the forget-set.
1 Introduction
Modern generative models, ranging from VAEs and DDPMs to large-scale systems such as Stable Diffusion
are trained on massive, high-dimensional datasets that frequently contain sensitive personal information.
As a result, growing regulatory and ethical pressures have intensified the need for machine unlearning: the
ability to remove or suppress the influence of specific data points, concepts, or classes after training.
Practical motivations for unlearning span several dimensions. Individuals may demand that facial images
resembling them in datasets such as CelebA be removed from the learned model. More broadly, erasing
semanticconceptsorclasslabelsenablesapathwaytowardcontrollableeditingandconcept-levelmodification
within generative models. In addition, unlearning supports safe guidance, where a model avoids sampling
from inappropriate or undesirable regions of the data distribution. These considerations, together with the
infeasibility of retraining large models from scratch, have made unlearning an increasingly active research
direction.
1
arXiv:2512.01054v1  [cs.LG]  30 Nov 2025
Large Language Models & Large generative models, including Diffusion Models (DDPMs, VAEs, Sta-
ble Diffusion), are typically trained on massive, high-dimensional datasets. Retraining these models from
scratch is computationally prohibitive, necessitating the development of efficient and effective unlearning
methodologies. Furthermore, unlearning serves as a foundation for concept erasure and general data editing,
while also bolstering defense against Membership Inference Attacks (MIA).
Our work significantly advances machine unlearning in generative models through several key innovations.
Beyond the adaptive SISS framework, we explore methods that bridge existing limitations. Specifically, we
investigate a hybrid objective that merges the robust, data-dependent unlearning control of the SISS frame-
work with the efficient, conditional score-alignment of SFD. This synthesis aims to achieve rapid and effective
concept erasure while maintaining high generative quality. Building on this, we introduce a Reinforcement
Learning-based machine unlearning method. This RL approach allows the unlearning procedure itself to be
optimized as a sequential decision-making process, enabling the model to learn context-aware, temporally
optimal updates that maximize forgetting while minimizing performance degradation on the retain set. This
is a crucial step toward creating truly robust and efficient unlearning protocols.
2 Related Works
Several approaches to machine unlearning have been explored. A straightforward strategy applies gradient
ascent on a designated forget-set to counteract learned influence. Other methods operate in latent space,
steering samples toward alternative semantic directions. Weight-saliency-based approaches attempt to iden-
tify and suppress parameter subsets most responsible for memorisation. More recently, works such as Ermon
et al. (SISS framework) propose relaxing the goal of exact unlearning by instead attenuating the contribution
of forgotten data in a controlled manner, acknowledging that strict removal often harms generative fidelity.
However, existing frameworks exhibit notable limitations. Many assume that forgotten samples should
map to pure noise like [9], which leads to semantically broken or incoherent generations, contradicting the
practical goal of replacing forgotten content with meaningful high-probability alternatives.
In our work, we focus on several key ideas. First, we address the poor forgetting and sample-generation
performance of the SISS framework by introducing additional components to its design. In Ermon et al.’s
work, the parameterλ; the Bernoulli variable controlling the probability of sampling from the forget-set
during the DDPM backward process was fixed atλ=1
2 . Whenλapproaches0or1, SISS effectively draws
its noisy latents almost entirely from the retain set or from the forget set, respectively, producing latents that
are unlikely to be sampled from the opposite distribution. Therefore, this fixed choice can be problematic, as
different images may require different values ofλ. To remedy this, we propose samplingλfrom a posterior
distribution, which leads to significantly improved performance compared to the original method.
Second, we revisit the label-assignment strategy used for guidance within the SFD framework, proposing
improvements for more effective unlearning.
Third, we explore a unified approach that combines ideas from both the first and second directions.
Finally, we introduce a reinforcement-learning–based machine-unlearning method to further enhance
unlearning efficiency and robustness.
3 Problem Formulation
LetD={x i}n
i=1 denote the original training data. Suppose we wish to unlearn a subsetF={aj}k
j=1 ⊂ D.
Retraining the full model, parameterized byθ, on the retain-setR=D \ Fis typically infeasible due to
computational cost and model scale. The ideal exact machine unlearning objective is to achieve parity
between the model trained on the full dataset and a hypothetical model trained only on the retain-set:
pθ(x| D)≈p(x| R).
To approximate this goal efficiently, most unlearning methods adopt a bi-criteria optimization based on
the empirical risk minimization framework, balancing the effort to suppress the forget-set’s influence while
preserving performance on the retain-set:
θ∗ = arg min
θ
{Lretain −αL forget}.
2
Here,L retain andL forget are loss functions or divergence measures defined over samples from the retain-set
Rand forget-setF, respectively, andα >0is a scalar hyperparameter controlling the forgetting strength.
This general structure is the foundation for numerous state-of-the-art unlearning techniques. For instance,
the SISS framework explicitly uses this adversarial loss structure on a mixture distribution, while the Score
Forgetting Distillation (SFD) framework employs a variant whereLretain is a knowledge distillation loss
andL forget aligns the forget-concept score with a retain-concept score. Similarly, other approaches, such as
those minimizing the KL divergence between the unlearned and vanilla model outputs on the retain-set and
maximizing it on the forget-set, adhere to this core objective.
4 Preliminaries
In this section, first we will review VAE & DDPM models and afterwards, we will continue with SISS & SFD
frameworks
4.1 Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)
Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)[1, 2] are a generative model that learns alatent variablerepresen-
tation of the data. They consist of two main components: anEncoder(or inference model),qϕ(z|x), and
aDecoder(or generative model),p θ(x|z).
The Encoder maps an input data pointxto a distribution over the latent spacez, introducing the
necessarystochasticity. The Decoder reconstructs the dataxfrom a samplezdrawn from this latent
distribution. The model is trained to maximize theevidence lower bound (ELBO), which is a tractable
lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data,logp(x).
The ELBO objective function is given by:
LVAE(θ, ϕ;x) =Eqϕ(z|x)
h
logp θ(x|z)
i
−D KL

qϕ(z|x)∥p(z)

Thefirst termis thereconstruction loss, ensuring the decoder accurately recreates the input. The
second termis theKullback-Leibler (KL) divergencebetween the learned posteriorq ϕ(z|x)and a
prior distributionp(z)(typically Gaussian), which acts as aregularizerto structure the latent space.
4.2 Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPMs)
4.2.1 DDPM (VAE-Based Approach)
TheForward Processis a fixed Markov chain that gradually addsGaussian noiseto the datax0 overT
time steps. The transition probability is:
q(xt|xt−1) =N

xt;
p
1−β txt−1, βtI

whereβ t is a predefined noise schedule. If this process continues for many steps (T→ ∞), the data
distributionp(x 0)is diffused into a simple, knownGaussian distribution,p(xT )≈ N(0,I).
TheReverse Processis a learned Markov chain that reverses the diffusion, graduallydenoisingthe
data fromxT back tox0. The transition probabilities are parameterized by a neural network (e.g., aU-Net):
pθ(xt−1|xt) =N

xt−1;µ θ(xt, t),Σθ(xt, t)

In practice, the simplified training objective minimizes the mean squared error between the true noiseϵand
the noise predicted by the modelϵθ [4]:
LDDPM(θ) =E t,x0,ϵ
hϵ−ϵ θ
 √¯αt x0 +
√
1−¯αt ϵ, t
2
2
i
3
4.2.2 Score-Based DDPM & SDE Approach
This perspective focuses on learning thescore functionof the noisy data distribution,s(x, t) =∇x logp t(x).
The score function is avector fieldthat, at any pointx, points towards the nearest high-probability region
of the data distribution. The generative modelsθ(x, t)is trained to approximate this true score function [5].
The training is done using thedenoising score matchingloss:
LSGM(θ) =E t,x0,xt
h
∥sθ(xt, t)− ∇xt logq(x t |x 0)∥2
2
i
This framework unifies DDPMs by defining the noise injection and generation process viaStochastic
Differential Equations (SDEs)[8].
The continuousForward SDEfor noise injection is:
dx=f(x, t)dt+g(t)dw
wheref(x, t)is the drift,g(t)is the diffusion coefficient, andwis the standard Wiener process.
The correspondingReverse SDEfor sampling and generation is:
dxt =
h
f(xt, t)−g(t)2∇xt logp t(xt)
i
dt+g(t) d ¯wt (1)
whered¯ wis the infinitesimal reverse-time Wiener process. By substituting the learned scoresθ(x, t)for
∇x logp t(x)and solving the SDE numerically, new data samples are generated.
4.3 SISS Framework
The SISS framework utilizes a mixture distributionqλ(mt)from which the noisy samplemt is drawn at time
stept
∀λ∈[0,1] :q λ(mt|x, a) = (1−λ)q(mt|x) +λq(m t|a)(2)
whereq(m t|x) =N(m t|γtx, σ2
t I). It is like tossing a coin and if it was heads which happens with probability
ofλ, we sample fromF, otherwise, we sample fromR=D\F.
The unlearning objectiveLsiss is defined using the retain and forget loss components,Lretain andL forget,
which employ Importance Sampling (IS) to correct for sampling fromqλ:
Lretain(x, a, mt, t;θ) = n
n−k
q(mt|x)
qλ(mt|x, a)

mt −γ tx
σt
−ϵ θ(mt, t)

2
2
Lforget(x, a, mt, t;θ) = k
n−k
q(mt|a)
qλ(mt|x, a)

mt −γ ta
σt
−ϵ θ(mt, t)

2
2
(3)
whereϵ θ(mt, t)is the predicted noise by the UNet with parametersθ. The n
n−k and k
n−k terms are
dataset-size-related weighting terms, wherenis the total dataset size andkis the size of the forget set.The
overall unlearning loss is:
Lsiss =E x∼PX Ea∼PA Et∼PT Emt∼qλ
h
Lretain −(1 +s)L forget
i
=E x∼PX Ea∼PA Et∼PT Emt∼qλ
"
n
n−k · q(mt |x)
qλ(mt |x, a)
mt −γ tx
σt
−ϵ θ(mt, t)

2
2
−(1 +s)· k
n−k · q(mt |a)
qλ(mt |x, a)
mt −γ ta
σt
−ϵ θ(mt, t)

2
2
#
(4)
, wheres≥0is a scale factor for the forget loss. Here is the algorithm of SISS Framework:
4
Algorithm 1: Static-λSISS Unlearning for DDPMs
Require:DatasetD, Forget setF, Retain setR, Modelε θ, Noiseq, mixture weightλ, learning rate
η, scalings, epochsE
1:fore= 1toEdo
2:Samplex∼ R,a∼ F,t∼P T
3:Sample latent:m t ∼q λ(mt) = (1−λ)q(m t|x) +λq(m t|a)
4:Retain Loss:
Lret ← |D|
|R|
q(mt|x)
qλ(mt)
mt−γtx
σt
−ε θ(mt, t)

2
5:Forget Loss:
Lforget ← |D|
|F|
q(mt|a)
qλ(mt)
mt−γta
σt
−ε θ(mt, t)

2
6:Total loss:L SISS ← Lret −(1 +s)L forget
7:Optionally clip/scale gradient ofL forget
8:Update:θ←θ−η∇ θLSISS
9:end for
Figure 1: Static-λSISS unlearning for DDPMs.
4.4 SFD Framework
TheSFD (Score Forgetting Distillation)framework enables data-free machine unlearning in diffusion
models by distilling knowledge from a pretrained model into a one-step generator while aligning scores of
forget classes/concepts with retain ones. For a forget conditioncf and override conditionco from the retain
setC r, the framework optimizes a generatorgθ(n, c)withn∼ N(0, I)such that the induced distribution
Dθ,cf matchesp data(x|c o), while preservingDθ,cr ≈p data(x|c r)forc r ∈C r.
Noisy samples are generated via forward diffusion:zt =a tx+σ tϵt withϵ t ∼ N(0, I),x∼D θ,c, where
at, σt follow the diffusion schedule. The pretrained model provides the scoresϕ(zt, c, t) =∇zt lnp data(zt |c)
and mean predictorx ϕ(zt, c, t). The generator’s optimal score issψ∗(θ)(zt, c, t) =atxψ∗(θ)(zt, c, t)−zt/σ2
t ,
whereψ ∗(θ)minimizes the denoising score matching loss over fake data.
The core SFD loss aligns pretrained and generator scores across conditions:
Lsfd(θ;ϕ, c1, c2) =E zt,t,x∼Dθ,c2
h
ωt
sϕ(zt, c1, t)−sψ∗(θ)(zt, c2, t)

2
2
i
,(5)
with re-weightingω t >0. This decomposes into distillationL sfd(θ;ϕ, cr, cr)and forgettingL sfd(θ;ϕ, co, cf )
components (which is quite the forget & retain approach).
The overall objective balances retention and forgetting:
Lsfd =E cr∼Cr
h
Lsfd(θ;ϕ, cr, cr) +λL sfd(θ;ϕ, co, cf )
i
,(6)
whereλ >0are balancing hyperparameters. In practice, alternating optimization betweenθand an approx-
imate score networkψuses an equivalent form via Tweedie’s formula:
ˆLsfd
 
θ, ψ;ϕ, c1, c2, α

= (1−α)ω ta2
t σ4
t ∥xϕ(zt, c1, t)−xψ(zt, c2, t)∥2
2
+ω ta2
t σ4
t (xϕ(zt, c1, t)−xψ(zt, c2, t))⊤(xψ(zt, c2, t)−x)
(7)
withα∈ {1,1.2}andω t =σ 4
t a2
t C∥xϕ(zt, t, c)−x∥sg
1 for stop-gradient. This data-free approach requires only
the pretrained score network, enabling efficient unlearning without real or fully denoised samples.
5 Our Contribution
5.1 Reforming SISS Framework
The primary limitation of SISS is the fixedλ. We introduce a novel approach to learn an adaptiveλat each
unlearning step, making the process dynamic and sensitive to the current degree of forgetting and retention.
5
The SISS framework utilizes a weighted sampling distributionqλ(mt|x, a)wherexis a retain-set sample
andais a forget-set sample. The parameterλ∈[0,1]controls the mixture. Our key innovation is to replace
the fixedλwith a neural network that learns its optimal value during the unlearning process. This learnedλ
is designed to be adaptive to the current state of the unlearning process, encoded by context features derived
from the SISS loss components.
5.1.1 Variational Inference forλ
We treatλas a latent variable and utilize a separate, small neural network, parametrized byϕ, to infer its
distributionq ϕ(λ)given a set of features describing the current state of the unlearning process. This leads
to a Variational Autoencoder (VAE)-like objective applied to the SISS loss:
LELBO =E λ∼qϕ(λ)
h
Lsiss(λ) +βD KL

qϕ(λ)||p(λ)
i
=E x∼PX Ea∼PAEt∼PT Eλ∼qϕ(λ)Emt∼qλ
"
n
n−k · q(mt|x)
qλ(mt|x, a)

mt −γ tx
σt
−ϵ θ(mt, t)

2
2
−(1 +s)· k
n−k · q(mt|a)
qλ(mt|x, a)

mt −γ ta
σt
−ϵ θ(mt, t)

2
2
#
+βD KL

qϕ(λ)||p(λ)

(8)
his loss simultaneously optimizes the diffusion model parametersθthroughLsiss(λ)and the inference net-
work parametersϕthrough the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term,DKL, which regularizes the posterior
qϕ(λ)towards a priorp(λ). We can assumep(λ)is a simple uniform or Gaussian prior.
5.1.2 Context Feature Vector and Reparameterization
To makeλadaptive, the inference networkq ϕ(λ)takes a context vectorvas input, which encapsulates the
current unlearning feedback:
v=
h
Lretain,Lforget,||∇θLretain||,||∇θLforget||
i
The network outputs the parameters(µϕ(v), σϕ(v))for a Gaussian distribution on a latent variablez. We
use the reparameterization trick to ensure that the gradient can flow back toϕ:
z=µ ϕ(v) +ξ·σ ϕ(v), ξ∼ N( ⃗0, I)
The final adaptiveλis obtained by passingzthrough a sigmoid function to constrain it to the interval[0,1]
(The architecture of our framework is depicted in Figure 2):
λ=σ(z) = 1
1 +e −z
.
This approach has two benefits, one clearly makes the SISS framework much mature and with better
performance, secondly it does not use any other pretrained model and it is very easy to calculate because we
made a gaussian prior assumption which makes the KL divergence a very easy differentiable function and
also for generation ofλ, we used sigmoid function, another easily differentiable function.
For the context feature vectorv, we selected the retain and forget losses along with the norms of their
corresponding gradients. In practice, this combination provided a sufficiently informative and stable signal
for the inference network to learn an effective mapping to the adaptiveλ. Within this setup, the model can
be trained end-to-end to infer an optimal balance between forgetting and retention based solely on these core
optimization dynamics. Although this minimal set of features already yielded strong performance, an alter-
native extension would be to augmentvwith semantic or representation-level features such as embeddings
or concept-specific activations. Such additions could potentially enrich the contextual information available
to the inference network, although we leave this direction for future exploration.
6
5.1.3 Backpropagation and Gradient Update
The gradient of ELBO with respect to the inference network parametersϕis calculated using the chain rule,
using the reparameterization trick:
∂LELBO
∂ϕ =E λ∼qϕ(λ)
"
∂Lsiss
∂λ · ∂λ
∂z
 
∂z
∂µ · ∂µ
∂ϕ + ∂z
∂σ · ∂σ
∂ϕ
!
+β ∂DKL
∂ϕ
#
The intermediate derivatives are:
∂λ
∂z =λ(1−λ), ∂z
∂µ = 1, ∂z
∂σ =ξ
We can also observe that our changes to the original SISS framework do not add significant computational
cost. This is clear from the derivatives above and because the derivative of the KL divergence is easily
computed.
Figure 2: Our own method is depicted in this image.
5.2 Adaptive-λMulti-Class Concept Erasure for Score-Based Unlearning
While SISS is VAE-based, the adaptiveλconcept can enhance score-function-based unlearning methods
like Score Forgetting Distillation (SFD). SFD, which seeks to approximate the unlearned score function
∇x logp(x)via distillation, is generally more effective for concept erasure (e.g., erasing a labelcf in favor of
co).The SFD objective combines a retaining distillation loss and a forgetting loss:
Lsfd(θ, ψ)∝ ˆLsfd(θ, ψ;. . . , cr, cr, α) +λˆLsfd(θ, ψ;. . . , co, cf , α)
whereψare parameters for a teacher network andcr is the retain class.We propose a multi-class extension
using an adaptiveλfor the concept erasure portion:
Eλ∼qϕ(λ)
"
ˆLsfd(θ, ψ;ϕ, cr, cr, α) +
X
co∈Cretain
q(mt|co)
qλ(x,C)
ˆLsfd(θ, ψ;ϕ, co, cf , α)
#
Here, the forgetting process ofcf is directed towards a mixture of all retain classesco ∈ Cretain, weighted by
an adaptiveλ. The importance weight q(mt|co)
qλ(x,C) is adapted to the multi-class context, guiding the model to
a high-probability manifold other than the one associated with the forget class.
5.3 Unlearning as a Sequential Decision Process: Reinforcement Learning for
λSelection
Traditional unlearning methods, including the Static-λSISS framework and simple heuristic scheduling,
primarilyemployagreedy approachtolossbalancing. Thesemethodsoptimizeλbasedonlyontheimmediate
7
objective, failing to account for the crucial long-term effects that a single regularization weight choice has
on the unlearning stability and the final state of the model. To overcome this fundamental limitation and
learn a policy that maximizes long-term, discounted unlearning success, we re-frame the selection of the
regularization weightλt at steptas a formalMarkov Decision Process (MDP).
5.3.1 MDP Formulation for Adaptiveλ
The unlearning process is modeled as an MDP defined by the tupleM= (S,A,R,T, γ), where the policy
πlearned by the agent determines the optimalλt given the current state.
TheState Space (S)is designed to provide the agent with a complete, low-dimensional view of the
current unlearning dynamics and history. The stateSt at timetcaptures the instantaneous loss values, the
magnitude of the model’s response to these losses via gradient norms, the immediate past action, and the
progression of time:
St =
n
Lretain,Lforget,||∇θLretain||,||∇θLforget||, λt−1, t
o
TheAction Space (A)is a single-dimensional continuous space, representing the chosen regularization
weightλ t for the current step:
At =
n
λt ∈[λ min, λmax]
o
The formulation of theReward Function (R)is critical, as it encodes the desired trade-off. The
immediate rewardR t is designed to maximizeunlearning efficacy(L forget − Lretain), while simultaneously
applying penalties to enforce training stability and model safety. The term−γ|λt −λ t−1|penalizes large,
erratic changes in the action, thus promoting a smoother unlearning trajectory. The term−L2
retain acts as
a strong safety penalty, ensuring the policy prioritizes minimal degradation on the retain set:
Rt =−L retain +L forget| {z }
Unlearning Efficacy
−γ|λ t −λ t−1|| {z }
Stability Penalty
− L 2
retain| {z }
Safety Penalty
5.3.2 RL Algorithms for Policy Optimization
To learn the optimal continuous policyπ(λt|St), we consider several robust policy optimization algorithms
suited for continuous control tasks.
Monte Carlo Policy Gradient (MCPG)As a foundational method for optimizing a stochastic policy
πθ(λt|St), the Monte Carlo Policy Gradient aims to adjust the policy parametersθin the direction of higher
return. Given the stochastic nature of theλselection (similar to our proposedλ-encoder from the Variational
Inference section), a policy loss can be derived that incorporates a regularization term:
Lpolicy =−R t log(πθ(λt|St)) +βD KL(qϕ(z)||p(z))
Here,R t acts as an estimated advantage or return, and the KL divergence term helps to constrain the policy
distribution.
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)Proximal Policy Optimization is a highly stable and sample-
efficient on-policy algorithm used to perform the optimization. PPO improves upon standard Policy Gradient
methods by employing aclipped surrogate objective. This clipping mechanism prevents extreme policy shifts
by bounding the probability ratior t(θ) = πθ(At|St)
πθold (At|St) . This stability is crucial in the volatile setting of
machine unlearning, as it prevents the policy from converging to poor local optima early in the training
process. The clipped objective is designed to maximize the following expression, where the clipping region
prevents drastic divergence:
max
θ
E
h
min

rt(θ) ˆAt,clip(r t(θ),1−ϵ,1 +ϵ) ˆAt
i
8
Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) with Entropy RegularizationDDPG is an es-
tablished off-policy algorithm for deterministic continuous control, where the policy directly outputs the
continuousλ t =π θ(St). To ensure adequate exploration in the complexλspace, especially early in the pro-
cess, the deterministic action is often perturbed by noise:λt =π θ(St) +ϵ. Furthermore, the algorithm can
be modified to incorporatemaximum entropy regularization, similar to methods like Soft Actor-Critic (SAC).
The objective function is augmented with the policy’s entropyH(π)to encourage broader exploration:
L=E[Q(S, A)] +αH(π)
While DDPG is considered the "Best Continuous Control" framework for many applications, the use of a fully
entropy-regularized approach for a single-dimensional action spaceλmay introduce unnecessary complex-
ity. However, the benefits of improved exploration and robustness could still outweigh the implementation
overhead.
6 Experiments
Experiment A
To illustrate practical behavior, we construct an augmented MNIST dataset in which class “1” is contami-
nated withFashion-MNISTtrousers in a1 : 10ratio. A conditional diffusion model trained on these data
learns hybrid semantics for the label “1” (refer to Figure 3). We train: a baseline model, an SISS unlearning,
our adaptive-λmethod. It is also worth mentioning that we use EMA smoothing and Flipping to make the
Baseline DDPM model be able to generate trousers as well conditional on label1.
Figure 3: The Augmented-Mnist Dataset is depicted in this image.
Across repeated runs, qualitative samples and quantitative metrics: KID, FID, SSIM, and IS; show that
our framework more effectively removes trouser content while restoring clean digit structure, outperforming
SISS consistently (please refer to Table 1 & Appendix). Additional CIFAR-10 and ImageNet results will be
included in the final paper.
Table 1: Comparison of Metrics Across Methods (Mean±Std)
Metric Forget Set Retain Set
Baseline Dynamic SISS Baseline Dynamic SISS
FID 145.03±12.5 214.83±18.0 243.51±20.5 32.92±2.8 39.41±3.2 62.67±5.1
KID 0.93±0.21 1.72±0.19 0.83±0.12 0.06±0.01 0.06±0.01 0.16±0.02
IS 2.20±0.16 1.69±0.06 1.89±0.07 1.75±0.12 1.73±0.11 1.72±0.10
SSIM 0.65±0.08 0.70±0.17 0.86±0.11 0.38±0.03 0.42±0.03 0.29±0.02
For the MNIST dataset, in the tasks that we defined, for the FID score metrics (the lower the score, the
better), in the retain set our model has a lower score vs. the SISS framework with respect to the baseline.
This is also visible in per-class evaluations. In KID metrics (the lower the better as well), our model is
getting much lower KID vs. SISS with respect to the baseline model, and it is having much higher KID with
9
respect to the baseline and SISS as we want our model not to perform well on the forget set! We can also
see how much we are close to baseline metrics per class in general. The same things apply to SSIM metrics;
however, there is not much difference in IS scores.
Furthermore, the qualitative comparison in Figure 4 illustrates the visual differences between the gener-
ated samples. The baseline model is shown on the left, SISS in the middle, and our proposed method on the
right. In our experiments, the samples produced by our method exhibit clearer separation between retained
and forgotten concepts compared to the SISS framework.
Figure 4: Visualization of samples generated by each model: baseline (left), SISS (middle), and our method
(right).
7 Conclusion
In this work, we addressed the critical challenge of balancing the competing objectives of model fidelity
and unlearning efficacy within the Stochastic Sampling Importance Sampling (SISS) framework for machine
unlearning in Diffusion Models[6]. We identified the primary limitation of existing methods as the use of a
staticλhyperparameter, which fails to account for the dynamic, sample-dependent nature of the unlearning
process. To overcome this, we introducedthe Adaptive-λSISSframework, which leverages Variational
Inference to learn an optimal, context-dependent distribution overλ. By conditioningλon a feature vector
derived from the currentretain and forget losses, our approach enables the model to dynamically adjust the
penalty applied to the forget objective during training.
Our empirical analysis demonstrated that the Adaptive-λapproach achieves superior performance across
challenging concept erasure tasks. Specifically, the dynamic approach significantly improved the unlearning
metrics (e.g., FID, KID) for the Forget Set, confirming greater erasure efficacy, while maintaining or even
improving the generative fidelity metrics (e.g., IS, SSIM) on the Retain Set compared to the Static-λbaseline.
This substantiates the core hypothesis: a learned, adaptive loss balancing mechanism yields a more stable
and effective unlearned model, successfully mitigating the common trade-off between forgetting and retaining
capabilities.
We also extended this dynamic loss balancing to a more sophisticated, sequential decision-making process
by formalizing the unlearning task as a Reinforcement Learning (RL) problem. This framework will model
the loss balancing as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), allowing an agent to learn a policy that maximizes
a reward function tied to both retention and forgetting metrics over an entire unlearning epoch, promising
an even greater degree of control and performance stability.
10
References
[1] Kingma, D. P., & Welling, M. (2013). Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes.arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114.
[2] Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., & Wierstra, D. (2014). Stochastic Backpropagation and Approximate
Inference in Deep Generative Models.arXiv preprint arXiv:1401.4082.
[3] Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Mané, D., Allec, R., & Ermon, S. (2015). Deep Unsupervised Learning
using Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics.arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.03585.
[4] Ho, J., Jain, A., & Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.11239.
[5] Song, Y., & Ermon, S. (2019). Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribution.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05600.
[6] Alberti, S., Hasanaliyev, K., Shah, M., & Ermon, S. (2025). Data Unlearning in Diffusion Models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.01034.
[7] Chen, T., Zhang, S., & Zhou, M. (2024). Score Forgetting Distillation: A Swift, Data-Free Method for
Machine Unlearning in Diffusion Models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11219.
[8] Song, Y., Chen, J., & Ermon, S. (2020). Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differential
Equations.arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456.
[9] Li, G., Hsu, H., Chen, C.-F. (Richard), & Marculescu, R. (2024). Machine Unlearning for Image-to-Image
Generative Models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00351.
11
Appendix A
Algorithm 2: Adaptive-λSISS Unlearning for DDPMs
Require:DatasetD, Forget setF, Retain setR, Modelε θ, Inference Netεϕ, noiseq, learning rateη, scaling factors,
KL-weightβ, epochsE
1: Initializeθ,ϕ, priorp(λ)
2:fore= 1toEdo
3: Samplex∼ R,a∼ F,t∼P T
4:Base Losses:
Lbase
ret =
mt−γtx
σt
−ε θ(mt, t)

2
Lbase
forget =
mt−γta
σt
−ε θ(mt, t)

2
5:Context:v=
h
Lbase
ret ,Lbase
forget,||∇θLbase
ret ||,||∇θLbase
forget||
i
6:Adaptiveλ(Reparam):
(µϕ, σϕ) =εϕ(v); sampleξ∼ N(0, I),z=µ ϕ +ξσ ϕ,λ=σ(z)
7: Sample latent:m t ∼q λ(mt) = (1−λ)q(mt|x) +λq(mt|a)
8:Weighted Losses:
Lret(λ) = |D|
|R|
q(mt|x)
qλ(mt) Lbase
ret
Lforget(λ) = |D|
|F|
q(mt|a)
qλ(mt) Lbase
forget
9:Total:L SISS =L ret(λ)−(1 +s)L forget(λ)
10:ELBO:L ELBO =L SISS +βD KL(N(µϕ, σϕ)∥p(λ))
11: Update:θ←θ−η∇ θLELBO,ϕ←ϕ−η∇ ϕLELBO
12:end for
Figure 5: Adaptive-λSISS Unlearning using a VAE-like inference network for dynamicλ.
12
Appendix B
Average Metrics
Per-Class Metrics
Figure 6: MNIST experiment Average and Per-Class metrics displayed side-by-side in a single row.
13