MARSAD: A Multi-Functional Tool for Real-Time Social Media Analysis
Md. Rafiul Biswas1, Firoj Alam2, Wajdi Zaghouani3
1Hamad bin Khalifa University, Qatar,2Qatar Computing Research Institute, Qatar
3Northwestern University in Qatar, Qatar,
Abstract
MARSAD is a multi-functional natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) tool designed for real-
time social media monitoring and analysis, with
a focus on the Arabic-speaking world. It em-
powers researchers and users without coding
expertise to analyze both live and archived so-
cial media data, generating detailed visualiza-
tions and reports across dimensions such as sen-
timent analysis, emotion analysis, propaganda
detection, fact-checking, and hate speech detec-
tion. MARSAD also offers secure data scrap-
ing capabilities using API keys for public social
media data. MARSAD’s backend architecture
combines flexible document storage with struc-
tured data management, enabling efficient han-
dling of large and multimodal datasets. The
frontend is designed to be user-friendly, allow-
ing for seamless data upload and interaction.
This paper outlines the architecture, key fea-
tures, and future enhancements of MARSAD,
positioning it as an essential tool for social me-
dia analytics.1
1 Introduction
MARSAD aims to empower users—ranging from
researchers to media analysts—with insights into
public opinion and social media dynamics. By pro-
viding in-depth analysis of online conversations,
the tool helps identify influential figures, track
trending topics, and find the sentiment of discus-
sions. This tool leverages advanced Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP) technologies and tradi-
tional software development technologies. There
are some existing tools like Communalytic2 that
allow users to download data and perform different
analyses such as sentiment, toxicity, and topic an-
alyzer and others. They use text embedding from
pre-trained transformer-based models to find top-
ics dynamically without human involvement. The
1A video demonstrating the system can be found at https:
//youtu.be/Bln8iSvwtWg?si=fLSfI4cpmbNSks33.
2https://communalytic.org/
core of the process involves converting the text
(social media posts, in this case) into embeddings,
which are numerical representations of the text’s
meaning. Commonly, pretrained transformer-based
models such as BERT (Devlin, 2018), RoBERTa
(Liu, 2019), Sentence-BERT (SBERT) (Reimers,
2019), or word2vec are used to generate these em-
beddings. Then, they classify the text by using
clustering and labeling them. However, this ap-
plication mainly focuses on English, French, and
German languages.
European News brief EMN News Brief 3 accu-
mulated news sources from online news portals
and provides a summary of results that got the
highest attraction among news sources. However,
they focus only on news channels and do not fo-
cus on social media channels. Another tool, social
media content Repear4 , scrapes data from social
media. By providing access tokens, API keys, and
search parameters, this tool enables downloading
public content available on social media. NLP
tool Social Media Sentiment Visualization5
can perform real-time analysis, but it is limited to
Reddit and Threads. Also, it does not allow the
uploading of user files and analysis of the data.
Tanbih6 allows users to identify propagandist con-
tent (Shah et al., 2024), fact-checking (Walter et al.,
2020), bias detection (Rodrigo-Ginés et al., 2024),
and clustering, especially in the Arabic language
article.
What sets MARSAD apart is its exclusive focus
on supporting the Arabic language, and it integrates
the significant types of analysis (e.g., sentiment,
propaganda, fact-checking) considerably in a sin-
gle platform (Biswas et al., 2024; Alam et al., 2024).
MARSAD is capable of handling multiple user re-
3https://emm.newsbrief.eu
4https://reaper.social/
5https://www.csc2.ncsu.edu/faculty/healey/social-media-
viz/production/
6https://tanbih.qcri.org/
arXiv:2512.01369v1  [cs.CL]  1 Dec 2025
quests and performing several tasks simultaneously.
Content that does not require an API key, such as
Reddit and online news portals, can be analyzed
in real-time and provide different kinds of visual-
izations and summary results. By providing the
API key and access token obtained from social me-
dia (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube), MARSAD
will work as a data crawling platform, same as
CrowdTangle.7 Moreover, it includes the integra-
tion of five major regional Arabic dialects, making
it the first social media monitoring tool to offer
such comprehensive linguistic coverage in Arabic.
Through its state-of-the-art NLP tools, MARSAD
handles the linguistic diversity of the region, ac-
commodating variations in dialects and enabling
more accurate and culturally relevant analysis. Ad-
ditionally, we plan to integrate Arabic-named entity
recognition (Qu et al., 2023), enabling the identifi-
cation of proper names, geographical locations, and
organizations within social media posts (Lozano
et al., 2017).
2 MARSAD Architecture
MARSAD architectural system can be divided into
two major part: i) frontend part ii) backend parts.
Figure 1 depicts the overview of the system archi-
tecture.
Frontend: In the frontend, the system interacts
directly with the end users, who upload datasets
that can include text, images, or multimodal data
(combinations of text and images). The system is
designed to accept various data formats, such as
CSV , TSV , and JSON/JSONL. Once the data is
submitted, it is validated with the structure and in-
tegrity of the uploaded data. It checks for missing
values, correct field types, and schema compliance.
It is performed by the Data Handler framework, by
the Data Handler framework, which has been de-
veloped using modern JavaScript frameworks and
libraries, including Next.js for server-side render-
ing, Flux for unidirectional data flow, and Node.js
for server-side operations.
After the validation process, the system gener-
ates metadata from the input data and stores it in the
appropriate databases. The figure shows this flow,
where user-provided data moves through the fron-
tend, is processed by the Data Handler, and then
transferred to the backend for further operations.
Once the data is successfully processed and
7https://transparency.meta.com/researchtools/other-
datasets/crowdtangle
stored, it is made available for visualization. The
visualization component allows users to explore
and analyze the results through a user-friendly in-
terface, likely including graphical representations
of the analyzed data.
Backend: In the backend, the system manages
the complex processing, analysis, and storage tasks,
ensuring efficient handling of large volumes of
data. The data is stored in ahybrid databasearchi-
tecture utilizing both MongoDB (Bradshaw et al.,
2019) for flexible, schema-less document storage
and PostgreSQL for structured, relational data man-
agement. This combination allows the system to
scale effectively while handling diverse datasets,
including multimodal, structured, and unstructured
data.
A core component of the backend is theModel
API, which serves as the interface between the ap-
plication and the underlying NLP models. This
API is responsible for coordinating requests for
various machine-learning models, including sen-
timent analysis, propaganda detection, and other
NLP tasks. These models are hosted in a container-
ized environment (e.g., using Docker) to ensure
scalability, isolation, and seamless deployment of
different versions (Docker, 2020).
The Model API leverages modern deep learn-
ing frameworks such as TensorFlow, PyTorch, and
Transformers, enabling it to load, fine-tune, and in-
fer from pre-trained models like AraBERT, MAR-
ERT (Abdul-Mageed et al., 2020), CamelBERT (In-
oue et al., 2021), or custom models for specialized
tasks like propaganda detection. It supports asyn-
chronous processing to handle high-throughput re-
quests and can manage multiple models simultane-
ously, ensuring low-latency responses and robust
performance even under heavy load.
Additionally, the backend side includestask
queues (e.g., Celery)8 to manage long-running
or resource-intensive operations like model infer-
ence or dataset processing. These queues allow the
system to prioritize tasks and manage concurrency
efficiently, enabling real-time user interactions with
the frontend while delegating complex analyses to
the background.
Security and data integrity are maintained
through the use of authentication and authoriza-
tion mechanisms (e.g., OAuth) to ensure that only
authenticated users can access and manipulate data
or trigger model executions. Data is encrypted
8https://github.com/celery/celery
Figure 1: System Architecture
both at rest and in transit using AES encryption
and SSL/TLS protocols, ensuring compliance with
data privacy standards. After the analysis is com-
pleted, the results are passed back through the sys-
tem, where they are processed by another Data
Handler component, which further organizes the
data and stores the results. Finally, the result is
ready for visualization on the frontend.
3 Prototype Demonstration
There are currently four main features in the
MARSAD: i) Use cases, ii) Analyze archive data,
iii) Search online and analyze, and iv) Data down-
load (see Figure 2). In the dashboard (see Figure
2), users can see the status of their files. Users
can start analyzing specific types of analysis (e.g.,
sentiment) by uploading files. Once the analysis
is done, it sends a notification to the users that
the analysis has been performed and is ready to
visualize. Users can export the file with the analy-
sis report. Moreover, users can modify the output
label that was classified by the tool through a self-
annotation process. Users can retrain the model
again with user-annotated feedback. This helps the
model better learn. Users request multiple analyses
at the same time. However, only one analysis is
performed at a time, and the other remains in the
queue due to the prototype hardware limitation.
3.1 Use Cases
MARSAD offers a wide range of use cases (i.e.,
examples for analyzed results), enabling users to
benefit from detailed analysis reports. To support
this, we are compiling a large dataset annotated by
human experts. These analyzed reports into multi-
ple dimensions are valuable resources for Arabic
NLP research and will be made publicly available
to the research community under a Creative Com-
Figure 2: Dashboard
mons license.
For this purpose, we have collected only publicly
available datasets and anonymized them to prevent
the disclosure of any private entities. Next, we an-
notate data from people in different Arabic dialects.
For the annotation tasks, we have employed several
annotators through crowd-sourcing. The annota-
tors participated in an intensive two- to three-week
training program, which included practical exer-
cises, studying annotation guidelines, and regular
meetings to ensure consistency in their work. Once
the data is fully annotated, it is processed through
our system, and the aggregated results are pub-
lished for public access. We continuously collect
trending data from social media, analyze it through
the MARSAD analyzer, and release the findings
to the public. These results are freely available
for anyone to access and utilize according to their
needs.
3.2 Analyze Archive Data
Users can upload their datasets—whether
collected independently or through exter-
nal sources—directly to the MARSAD tool.
MARSAD supports the upload of both text and
image data, allowing for a wide range of analysis
tasks. The tool is designed to accommodate
various data formats, such as CSV , JSON, or
JSONL for text, and standard image formats like
JPEG and PNG.
Primarily, MARSAD focuses on processing and
analyzing data in Arabic and English, catering to a
diverse user base that works with both languages.
For text data, MARSAD can handle tasks such as
sentiment analysis, propaganda detection, and topic
modeling, while image data can be processed for
visual sentiment analysis and propaganda detection.
For multimodal data—where text and images are
combined—the tool will apply specialized models
that consider both forms of input to generate more
comprehensive insights.
Additionally, MARSAD offers users flexibility
in terms of data preprocessing, allowing them to
configure settings for tokenization, normalization,
and cleaning, especially for text written in Arabic
dialects or informal languages. The tool is opti-
mized to handle large datasets and offers real-time
feedback on the data upload and analysis processes.
Once the data is processed, users can view the
results through interactive visualizations and down-
load detailed reports for further study.
3.3 Search Online and Analyze
Users are able to search for online content and
analyze data in real-time using MARSAD. This
feature allows users to monitor current trends and
public sentiment. However, this functionality is
available for publicly accessible datasets. There
are two ways to perform this task:
Free Access: In this mode, no API key or access
token is required. Users select any media platform
and provide search terms. MARSAD will then re-
trieve data from publicly available sources, prepro-
cess it, and perform the analysis. Once completed,
the results will be available for visualization.
API-Based Access: For data sources that require
an access token, users can provide an API key for
specific social media to MARSAD to search the
specified data sources. MARSAD will perform the
analysis and present the results accordingly.
3.4 Data Download
Users can use the MARSAD tool to download data
from social media platforms such as Facebook, X
(formerly Twitter), Instagram, YouTube, and more.
All they need to do is provide the API key for
the respective platform. A tutorial is available to
guide users on how to obtain API keys from these
platforms and download the data. With no coding
required, users can effortlessly gather data from
various social media sources.
4 Features of MARSAD
MARSAD is currently conducting several anal-
yses, and more features will be added in the fu-
ture. For this purpose, we continuously evaluate
the performance of the existing language model
and transformer-based model and integrate the best
model in terms of cost-effectiveness and perfor-
mance.Subtopic and Word Cloud: MARSAD
dynamically identifies subtopics from the user’s
dataset without requiring prior knowledge of the
data. First, we apply the Term Frequency-Inverse
Document Frequency (TF-IDF) technique to assess
the significance of words in relation to the docu-
ments. TF-IDF is calculated as follows:
TF-IDF(t, d, D) =TF(t, d)×IDF(t, D)
Next, the resulting text embeddings (TF-IDF ma-
trix) are clustered using the K-Means algorithm,
where the number of clusters is determined based
on the size of the dataset. After clustering, we ap-
plied Non-negative Matrix Factorization (NMF) to
extract essential words for each cluster. These key
terms are then aggregated to represent meaningful
subtopics, reflecting the major themes of interest
within the data. Additionally, MARSAD generates
a word cloud to visually display the most frequently
used words in the users’ posts, offering an intuitive
view of the prominent terms in the dataset.
Sentiment Analysis: We have employed a sepa-
rate model for language specific to get better results.
As there are two types of languages (i.e., Arabic
and English), we applied a separate model for sen-
timent analysis. We use CAMelBERT (Inoue et al.,
2021) for Arabic sentiment and google-bert/bert-
base-cased (Lee and Toutanova, 2018) for English
sentiment analysis. Each data will be identified
into positive, negative, and neutral sentiments with
a score.
Propagandist Content Identification: We ap-
plied (Shah et al., 2024) techniques to identify
whether a text belongs to propagandist content. The
techniques can identify propagandist content from
text, image, and multimodal data. Moreover, we
identified each text’s propagandist span and persua-
sion technique. We continuously add more features
like offensive, fact-checking, veracity, and check-
worthiness.
Sapital analysis: MARSAD includes function-
ality to identify and analyze user locations based on
the provided data, helping to visualize geographic
distribution and trends. By extracting location
metadata from user-generated content, such as geo-
tags or inferred locations from text, MARSAD can
map where users are located. This spatial analysis
allows for a deeper understanding of user demo-
graphics, regional preferences, and location-based
trends, providing valuable insights into how opin-
ions or sentiments vary across different areas. Fig-
ure 3. shows an example of spatial analysis.
Figure 3: User locations
Figure 4: Daily Trends
Trending Topics: Figure 4 shows the trending
posts over time. It helps to understand when it was
posted and found more public attraction. This tem-
poral analysis is valuable for identifying patterns
in user engagement, such as spikes during critical
events, trends around specific dates, or periods of
high interaction related to ongoing discussions.
Post analysis: Figure 5 shows that MARSAD
enables users to identify label, degree, and location
mentions of each post. For instance, a post can
be ranked by its sentiment strength, the level of
propaganda, or the severity of hate speech. This
helps users prioritize content based on its impact or
importance, offering deeper insight into each post
beyond simple categorization.
Network analyzer: The Network Analyzer fea-
ture in MARSAD identifies and visualizes the con-
nections between users who post content and those
who interact with it (such as by liking, sharing, or
commenting). By mapping out these relationships,
the system provides insights into how information
spreads within a network and how users influence
one another.
A key contribution of MARSAD is the creation
of a large-scale annotated corpus, which will be
shared across various sub-projects. This will foster
collaboration between different initiatives and pro-
vide valuable insights into the broader impact of
social media on society. By providing an in-depth
analysis of online conversations, the software tool
helps identify influential figures, track trending top-
Figure 5: Post analysis
ics, and understand the sentiment of discussions in
real-time (El-Masri et al., 2017). In addition to its
monitoring capabilities, MARSAD offers detailed
analytics that support decision-making and strat-
egy development for businesses, governments, and
academic institutions.
5 Conclusion and Future Works
MARSAD is a tool that integrates advanced NLP
techniques and provides analysis in different dimen-
sions. MARSAD will help the research community,
especially non-programmers, analyze social media
trends with zero coding knowledge. MARSAD
is being developed with continuous feedback to
maximize user needs. Currently, most of the NLP
models in MARSAD have been developed using
the transformer model. In the future, large lan-
guage models will be integrated to enhance user
experiences. Thus, it could deliver a valuable re-
source for Arabic social media content for those
seeking to understand and engage with the region’s
online discourse.
6 Ethical Considerations
In developing and releasing MARSAD, we are
mindful of multiple ethical considerations. The
tool is designed for research and educational pur-
poses, focusing on the analysis of online and social
media trends, especially the detection of propa-
ganda and hate speech. It is crucial that MARSAD
is used responsibly and in line with applicable laws,
data privacy regulations, and ethical standards.
Users must ensure that the tool is employed for
constructive purposes—such as identifying and mit-
igating harmful content—and not for amplifying
or spreading such content. We strongly encourage
users to exercise caution and responsibility in inter-
preting and sharing the results generated by the tool.
Additionally, MARSAD employs machine learning
models, including large language models (LLMs),
which may introduce inherent biases from the data
on which they were trained. To mitigate these risks,
we have implemented continuous evaluation pro-
cesses and encourage users to report any biases
or inaccuracies found. Ensuring transparency and
accountability is a key objective of this tool.
7 License
The MARSAD tool will be released under the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (CC BY 4.0). This license allows users
to share (copy and redistribute) and adapt (remix,
transform, and build upon) the tool in any medium
or format, provided appropriate credit is given to
the original creators. Users must link to the li-
cense, indicate if changes were made, and may
not apply legal terms or technological measures
that legally restrict others from doing anything
the license permits. Full details of the license
can be found athttps://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
8 Acknowledgement
The MARSAD tool is funded by grant NPRP 14C-
0916-210015 from the Qatar National Research
Fund, part of Qatar Research Development and
Innovation Council (QRDI).
9 Appendix
The current version of the MARSAD can be
found in the following URL https://youtu.be/
Bln8iSvwtWg?si=fLSfI4cpmbNSks33.
References
Muhammad Abdul-Mageed, AbdelRahim Elmadany,
and El Moatez Billah Nagoudi. 2020. Arbert &
marbert: Deep bidirectional transformers for arabic.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.01785.
Firoj Alam, Md Rafiul Biswas, Uzair Shah, Wajdi Za-
ghouani, and Georgios Mikros. 2024. Propaganda to
hate: A multimodal analysis of arabic memes with
multi-agent llms.arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07246.
Md Rafiul Biswas, Zubair Shah, and Wajdi Za-
ghouani. 2024. Mememind at araieval shared task:
spotting persuasive spans in arabic text with per-
suasion techniques identification.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.04540.
Shannon Bradshaw, Eoin Brazil, and Kristina Chodorow.
2019.MongoDB: the definitive guide: powerful and
scalable data storage. O’Reilly Media.
Jacob Devlin. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-
rectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Inc Docker. 2020. Docker.lınea].[Junio de 2017].
Disponible en: https://www. docker. com/what-
docker.
Mazen El-Masri, Nabeela Altrabsheh, Hanady Mansour,
and Allan Ramsay. 2017. A web-based tool for ara-
bic sentiment analysis.Procedia Computer Science,
117:38–45.
Go Inoue, Bashar Alhafni, Nurpeiis Baimukan, Houda
Bouamor, and Nizar Habash. 2021. The interplay
of variant, size, and task type in Arabic pre-trained
language models. InProceedings of the Sixth Ara-
bic Natural Language Processing Workshop, Kyiv,
Ukraine (Online). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
JDMCK Lee and K Toutanova. 2018. Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing.arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 3(8).
Yinhan Liu. 2019. Roberta: A robustly opti-
mized bert pretraining approach.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692.
Marianela García Lozano, Jonah Schreiber, and Joel
Brynielsson. 2017. Tracking geographical locations
using a geo-aware topic model for analyzing social
media data.Decision Support Systems, 99:18–29.
Xiaoye Qu, Yingjie Gu, Qingrong Xia, Zechang Li,
Zhefeng Wang, and Baoxing Huai. 2023. A survey
on arabic named entity recognition: Past, recent ad-
vances, and future trends.IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering.
N Reimers. 2019. Sentence-bert: Sentence embed-
dings using siamese bert-networks.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.10084.
Francisco-Javier Rodrigo-Ginés, Jorge Carrillo-de Al-
bornoz, and Laura Plaza. 2024. A systematic review
on media bias detection: What is media bias, how it
is expressed, and how to detect it.Expert Systems
with Applications, 237:121641.
Uzair Shah, Md Rafiul Biswas, Marco Agus, Mowafa
Househ, and Wajdi Zaghouani. 2024. Mememind
at araieval shared task: generative augmentation and
feature fusion for multimodal propaganda detection
in arabic memes through advanced language and vi-
sion models. InProceedings of The Second Arabic
Natural Language Processing Conference, pages 467–
472.
Nathan Walter, Jonathan Cohen, R Lance Holbert,
and Yasmin Morag. 2020. Fact-checking: A meta-
analysis of what works and for whom.Political com-
munication, 37(3):350–375.