1
Morphling: Fast, Fused, and Flexible GNN Training
at Scale
Anubhab Rupesh Nasre
anubhavkhajuria5@gmail.com rupesh@cse.iitm.ac.in
IIT Madras, IndiaIIT Madras, India
Abstract—Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) present a fun-
damental hardware challenge by fusing irregular, memory-
bound graph traversals with regular, compute-intensive dense
matrix operations. While frameworks such as PyTorch Geo-
metric (PyG) and Deep Graph Library (DGL) prioritize high-
level usability, they fail to address these divergent execution
characteristics. As a result, they rely on generic kernels that
suffer from poor cache locality, excessive memory movement,
and substantial intermediate allocations. To address these
limitations, we present Morphling, a domain-specific code
synthesizer designed to bridge this gap. Morphling com-
piles high-level GNN specifications into portable, backend-
specialized implementations targeting OpenMP, CUDA, and
MPI. It achieves this by instantiating a library of optimized,
architecture-aware primitives tailored to each execution en-
vironment. Morphling also incorporates a runtime sparsity-
aware execution engine that dynamically selects dense or
sparse execution paths using input feature statistics, reducing
unnecessary computation on zero-valued entries. We eval-
uate Morphling on eleven real-world datasets spanning di-
verse graph structures, feature dimensionalities, and sparsity
regimes. The results show that Morphling improves per-
epoch training throughput by an average of 20×on CPUs
and 19×on GPUs over PyG and DGL, with peak speedups
reaching 66×. Morphling’s memory-efficient layouts further
reduce peak memory consumption by up to 15×, enabling
large-scale GNN training on commodity hardware. These
findings demonstrate that specialized, architecture-aware
code synthesis provides an effective and scalable path toward
high-performance GNN execution across diverse parallel and
distributed platforms.
Index Terms—Graph Neural Networks, CUDA, IntelMKL,
OpenMP, MPI, Domain-Specific Language
I. Introduction
GNNs have become the standard for learning on graph-
structured data, powering applications ranging from recom-
mendation systems to scientific computing. Unlike traditional
neural networks that treat data points in isolation, GNNs
generate topology-aware representations by leveraging the
underlying structure of the data. They achieve this through
iterative message passing, where nodes update their embed-
dings by aggregating high-dimensional features from their
local neighborhoods. Their effectiveness stems from integrat-
ing irregular, memory-bound graph traversals directly with
regular, compute-intensive dense matrix operations. This
sparse–dense computational hybrid poses unique systems
challenges that are poorly addressed by existing general-
purpose frameworks.
To manage this complexity, practitioners typically turn
to frameworks like PyTorch Geometric (PyG) [1] and Deep
Graph Library (DGL) [2], which prioritize high-level pro-
grammability and seamless integration with PyTorch’s auto-
grad engine. However, because these frameworks represent
node features as dense tensors, they are forced to materialize
substantial intermediate data during message passing and to
execute redundant operations on naturally sparse inputs [4].
These choices introduce excessive memory movement, poor
cache locality, and costly intermediate allocations. These
challenges intensify significantly on graphs with large feature
dimensions or millions of edges. Moreover, PyG and DGL lack
unified abstractions for efficient execution across heteroge-
neous hardware. While CPUs thrive on cache-aware tiling
and SIMD vectorization, GPUs require warp-synchronous
kernels with coalesced memory access, and distributed clus-
ters necessitate rigorous communication–computation over-
lap. Since existing frameworks abstract away these platform-
specific decisions, they face fundamental challenges in en-
suring performance portability across architectures.
This optimization gap places practitioners in a difficult
bind: they must choose between the development speed of
high-level APIs and the raw performance of hand-tuned
execution. Opting for performance requires manually imple-
menting specialized kernels for CPUs, GPUs, and distributed
clusters; however, maintaining these distinct codebases is
error-prone and becomes increasingly unsustainable as hard-
ware architectures diversify. While specialized systems like
GNNAdvisor [3] and DGCL [4] attempt to bridge this gap,
they function as single-platform systems that lack cross-
platform portability and leave the overheads of dense feature
processing unresolved. Alternatively, graph DSLs such as
StarPlat [12], GraphIt [8], and Ligra [9] generate high-
performance code but are limited to classical graph analytics,
lacking essential support for backpropagation, optimizer up-
dates, or feature sparsity. Similarly, tensor compilers such
as Halide [18] and TVM [19] provide powerful scheduling
abstractions but treat GNNs as generic tensor programs.
Because they lack domain-specific primitives, they cannot
perform graph-aware optimizations across the full training
loop. These gaps highlight the need for a domain-specific ap-
proach that captures GNN computation at a high level while
enabling backend-specialized code generation. The solution
requires a sparsity-aware, memory-efficient architecture that
scales transparently across diverse backends.
To bridge this gap, we present Morphling, a synthesis-
oriented framework that generates backend-specialized C++
training code from compact high-level GNN specifications.
arXiv:2512.01678v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
2
Through synthesis, Morphling integrates architecture-aware
kernels for CPUs, GPUs, and distributed systems, chooses
between dense and sparse execution paths based on input
feature statistics, and embeds distributed communication and
partitioning logic directly into the generated code. This
design enables execution plans that align closely with each
backend’s memory hierarchy and parallelism model while
preserving the simplicity of high-level GNN programming.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•A GNN-native domain-specific languagebuilt on the
StarPlat DSL and extended with GNN-specific operators,
supporting forward propagation, neighborhood aggre-
gation, backpropagation, and optimizer updates while
abstracting away backend-specific complexity.
•A multi-backend code synthesis frameworkthat
generates optimized OpenMP, CUDA, and MPI imple-
mentations from a single high-level program, including
cache-tiled CPU kernels, warp-synchronous GPU ag-
gregation kernels, and communication-overlapped dis-
tributed execution.
•A runtime sparsity-aware execution enginethat
automatically selects efficient dense or sparse feature-
processing paths based on feature statistics, exploiting
feature-level sparsity without changing model seman-
tics.
•A comprehensive experimental evaluationacross
eleven real-world datasets demonstrating significant
throughput improvements over PyG and DGL on CPUs,
GPUs, and distributed clusters, along with up to15×
lower peak memory consumption.
II. Related Work
GNN Frameworks.PyG [1] and DGL [2] dominate GNN
development by offering extensive model libraries and seam-
less integration with PyTorch’s autograd engine. However,
their reliance on the gather-scatter paradigm [4] limits op-
portunities for kernel fusion and data reuse. First, they treat
node features as dense tensors, forcing the materialization of
large intermediate structures and precluding optimizations
for intrinsically sparse features (e.g., one-hot encodings).
Second, they lack a unified intermediate representation pre-
venting optimizations from generalizing across backends.
Consequently, targeting CPUs, GPUs, and clusters neces-
sitates managing disjoint optimization strategies, impeding
true performance portability. Some of these limitations have
motivated several systems that focus exclusively on GPU
execution.
Beyond general-purpose frameworks, some systems fo-
cus exclusively on GPU execution. These systems improve
GNN throughput by employing custom GPU kernels with
hardware-aware optimizations such as 2D partitioning and
neighbor grouping, as demonstrated by GNNAdvisor [3] and
DGCL [4]. However, like PyG and DGL, they assume dense
feature tensors, which limits the applicability of their opti-
mizations to workloads with intrinsic feature sparsity. While
they achieve high single-device throughput, they are tightly
coupled to GPU architectures and thus lack the flexibility to
generate code for CPUs or MPI-based clusters.
In the distributed setting, industrial systems like Ali-
Graph [5], Euler [6], and DistDGL [7] target billion-scale
graph training. However, their primary optimizations fo-
cus on distributed storage, I/O minimization, and sampling
strategies rather than the computational efficiency of the
core GNN computation. These systems emphasize scale and
data movement rather than computation efficiency, whereas
Morphling targets the optimization of the core GNN kernels
across CPU, GPU, and distributed backends.
Graph Processing DSLs.By separating algorithm specifi-
cation from execution scheduling, GraphIt [8] enables opti-
mizations for a wide range of graph analytics workloads. It
primarily generates optimized CPU code for classical graph
algorithms (PageRank, BFS) but does not support GNN train-
ing primitives like automatic differentiation or backpropaga-
tion. Other traversal-oriented frameworks, such as Ligra [9],
Galois [10], and Gemini [11], provide abstractions for parallel
graph traversals, but they lack support for neural network
computation and differentiation. Morphling was designed to
bridge this functional gap. It extends StarPlat’s multi-backend
code generation with domain-specific, primitives required for
GNN training.
Code Generation.General-purpose compilers such as
Halide [18] and TVM [19] promote performance portabil-
ity by separating algorithm specification from execution
scheduling. Halide [18] introduced this model for image
processing, and TVM [19] extends it to deep learning with
auto-scheduling. However, TVM still treats GNNs as conven-
tional neural networks and therefore cannot exploit graph-
specific optimizations. Similarly, TACO [20] generates effi-
cient sparse tensor kernels but operates only at the single-
operation level and does not support full training pipelines.
Meanwhile, polyhedral compilers such as Tiramisu [21] and
Tensor Comprehensions [22] require affine loop structures
and substantial manual tuning, making them not well aligned
with the Irregular sparsity patterns are inherent to GNN
computation.
Performance Portability Frameworks.Performance
portability aims to write code once and achieve efficient
execution across diverse hardware without manual porting.
Traditional approaches include:
a) Low-Level Abstractions.:Kokkos [23] and RAJA [24]
provide policy-based programming models in which devel-
opers write kernels once and specify execution policies (e.g.,
OpenMP or CUDA) separately. Similarly, SYCL [25] and
oneAPI [26] provide unified C++ models for heterogeneous
programming. Nonetheless, achieving high performance de-
pends on backend-specific tuning of work-group configura-
tions, memory layout, and kernel parameters. OpenCL [27]
exposes similar portability–performance tradeoffs, offering
broad hardware reach but requiring substantial manual op-
timization to match backend capabilities. Although these
frameworks support multiple backends, they operate at low
abstraction levels, requiring developers to manage memory
layouts, parallel execution policies, and loop transformations
explicitly. As a result, porting complex algorithms such
as GNN training still requires substantial manual effort,
particularly when expressing the sparse–dense computation
3
patterns and multi-stage data dependencies inherent to GNN
workloads.
b) Compiler-Based Approaches.:TVM [19] and
Halide [18] use high-level tensor programs with auto-
scheduling to generate optimized code. TVM supports
multiple backends but treats GNNs as generic neural
networks, missing graph-specific optimizations. TACO [20]
generates efficient sparse tensor kernels but operates on
individual operations, not full training pipelines.
c) Domain-Specific Languages.:DSLs like GraphIt [8]
separate algorithm specification from optimization schedules,
enabling automatic exploration of parallelization and locality
strategies. GraphIt targets traditional graph analytics (PageR-
ank, BFS) on CPUs but lacks neural network primitives.
Ligra [9] and Galois [10] provide vertex-centric abstractions
but do not support multi-backend code generation.
III. Background
A. Graph Neural Networks
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) extend deep learning to
graph-structured data by iteratively aggregating information
from node neighborhoods. A GNN layer combines two com-
putational phases: neighbor aggregation, which is sparse,
irregular, and memory-bound, and feature transformation,
which is dense, regular, and compute-intensive. Formally, the
feature update for nodevat layerℓis
h(ℓ)
v =σ

W(ℓ) ·AGGREGATE (ℓ)

{h(ℓ−1)
u :u∈ N(v)}

,
whereN(v)denotes the neighbors ofv,W (ℓ) is a learnable
weight matrix, andσis a nonlinear activation.
Different GNN architectures vary in their aggrega-
tion strategies. GCN [28] uses normalized mean aggrega-
tion, GraphSAGE [29] introduces sampling-based variants,
GIN [30] employs sum aggregation, and GAT [31] in-
corporates attention weights to modulate neighbor impor-
tance. Despite these differences, all models share the same
sparse–dense computational structure, and backpropagation
through this pattern amplifies the irregularity and memory
bandwidth demands, creating a challenging workload for
modern hardware.
B. Challenges in GNN System Design
a) Sparse-Dense Computational Hybrid.:GNN layers
combine sparse graph operations with dense matrix compu-
tations. The aggregation step involves sparse matrix-matrix
multiplication (SpMM) between the adjacency matrixA
and feature matrixH, exhibiting irregular memory access
patterns. The transformation step multiplies the aggregated
features by weight matrixW, typically implemented as
dense matrix multiplication (GEMM). Existing frameworks
like PyG [1] and DGL [2] optimize graph sparsity but
assume features are dense, wasting computation when input
features are intrinsically sparse (e.g., bag-of-words, one-hot
encodings).
b) Heterogeneous Hardware Deployment:GNN work-
loads span a wide range of graph sizes and therefore benefit
from diverse hardware platforms: multicore CPUs for mod-
erate sized datasets, GPUs for massively parallel aggregation,
and distributed clusters for datasets that exceed single-node
memory. Each platform requires a distinct optimization strat-
egy. CPUs rely on cache-aware tiling and SIMD vectorization
to mitigate irregular sparsity, while GPUs depend on warp-
level parallelism and coalesced memory access to sustain
throughput. Distributed systems introduce an additional layer
of complexity through graph partitioning, communication
scheduling, and computation–communication overlap. As a
result, supporting efficient GNN execution across CPUs,
GPUs, and distributed systems requires reconciling funda-
mentally different optimization strategies within a single
programming and execution model.
c) Feature Sparsity:Many real-world graphs contain
highly sparse node features. Text-based graphs rely on bag-
of-words or TF–IDF (Term Frequency–Inverse Document
Frequency) encodings with sparsity levels exceeding 90%,
and categorical attributes often use one-hot or multi-hot
representations. Despite this, standard GNN implementations
store features in dense form, leading to substantial redundant
computation, unnecessary memory traffic, and poor cache
utilization when multiplying by zeros. Sparse tensor libraries
in PyTorch [14] and TensorFlow [13] offer sparse represen-
tations, but they require manual conversion and are not
integrated with GNN operations such as neighborhood aggre-
gation or backpropagation. As a result, efficiently supporting
feature sparsity requires system-level mechanisms that can
adapt execution to the sparsity structure of the input features.
C. StarPlat: A versatile DSL for graph analytics
StarPlat [12] is a graph analytics DSL that generates
optimized code for OpenMP (shared-memory CPUs), CUDA
(GPUs), and MPI (distributed clusters) from a single high-
level specification. The system consists of:
a) Front-End DSL.:Users express graph algorithms us-
ing vertex-centric or edge-centric abstractions with parallel
loops, reductions, and conditional updates. The DSL provides
constructs for iterative algorithms, property propagation, and
graph traversals.
b) Compiler Infrastructure.:StarPlat’s compiler performs
lexical and syntactic analysis, builds an abstract syntax tree
(AST), and conducts semantic analysis to ensure type safety
and correctness. The intermediate representation captures
algorithm semantics independent of target hardware.
c) Multi-Backend Code Generation.:The StarPlat code
generator translates the intermediate representation into par-
allel implementations targeting graph analytics workloads:
•OpenMP: Generates#pragma omp parallel
forloops to parallelize vertex-centric computations
across available CPU cores [12].
•CUDA: Maps graph topology to the GPU thread hier-
archy, assigning vertices or edges to threads to execute
purely structural graph traversals [12].
4
•MPI: Synthesizes message-passing logic to synchronize
scalar vertex data across distributed partitions, utilizing
standard graph partitioning libraries [12].
Critically, StarPlat is designed for scalar graph algorithms
(e.g., BFS, SSSP) and lacks the specialized memory layouts,
SIMD vectorization, and gradient synchronization primitives
required for GNN training.
StarPlat achieves competitive performance with hand-
optimized implementations on standard graph benchmarks
while maintaining code portability. However, it focuses on
graph analytics and lacks support for neural network train-
ing.
D. Motivation for Morphling
While StarPlat provides a strong foundation for multi-
backend graph processing, GNN workloads introduce new
requirements:
a) Training-Specific Operations.:GNNs require forward
propagation with multiple aggregation schemes (mean, max,
sum), automatic differentiation through graph structures, and
integration with optimizers (SGD, Adam, AdamW). These
operations involve stateful computations, gradient accumu-
lation, and parameter updates absent in traditional graph
analytics.
b) Adaptive Sparsity Handling.:Graph analytics operate
primarily on sparse adjacency matrices with static sparsity
patterns. GNN features exhibit dynamic sparsity that varies
across datasets, layers, and epochs. Systems must adaptively
select dense or sparse execution paths based on runtime
profiling to avoid performance degradation.
c) Limitations of Standard Partitioning:A critical bottle-
neck in distributed GNN training is the choice of partitioning
strategy. Default implementations in PyG and DGL utilize
METIS to minimize edge-cuts. However, as noted in , min-
imizing edge-cuts is a proxy objective that fails to capture
the true cost of GNN execution. In power-law graphs, min-
imizing edge-cuts can paradoxically maximize the number
of unique ghost nodes (remote dependencies) if high-degree
hubs are placed on partition boundaries. Furthermore, METIS
partitions based on vertex counts, ignoring the fact that
computational cost in GNNs is proportional to the number of
edges (computational load). This leads to significant workload
imbalance, where some ranks idle while others process dense
hubs.
Morphlingextends StarPlat to address these challenges.
Specifically, it augments the DSL with GNN training prim-
itives and a hierarchical graph partitioner, while imple-
menting a sparsity-aware execution engine that dynamically
switches between dense and sparse kernels. Consequently,
the system generates optimized training code targeting
OpenMP, CUDA, and MPI backends. By leveraging StarPlat’s
IR as a static foundation while introducing a distributed,
hardware-adaptive training runtime, Morphling achieves per-
formance portability for graph learning workloads.
IV. Morphling DSL
Morphling bridges the implementation gap across het-
erogeneous hardware backends by decoupling high-level al-
gorithm specification from low-level execution details. The
system operates as a domain-specific code synthesizer that
lowers a single declarative program into bespoke imple-
mentations for multicore CPUs, many-core GPUs, and dis-
tributed clusters. During compilation, Morphling maps ab-
stract GNN constructs to architecture-intrinsic execution
models—generating OpenMP dynamic schedules for shared-
memory parallelism, CUDA kernels for GPU acceleration,
and MPI collectives for distributed synchronization. This
abstraction is critical for GNN workloads, where irregular
sparsity patterns defy the rigid optimizations of conventional
tensor compilers. By automatically instantiating backend-
specialized kernels—such as cache-tiled SIMD loops for CPUs
and warp-synchronous SpMM for GPUs—Morphling harmo-
nizes fundamentally different parallel paradigms under a
unified framework. This ensures consistent scalability and
performance portability across diverse memory hierarchies
without requiring manual backend tuning.
1functionSAGE(Graphg, GNNgnn,container<int>&
neuronsPerLayer, String Dataset) {
2gnn.load(g, Dataset);
3gnn.initializeLayers(neuronsPerLayer,"xaviers");
4for(intepoch = 0; epoch <totalEpoch; epoch++){
5for(intl = 0; l <gnn.getLayers(); l++)
6gnn.forwardPass(l,"SAGE", "Max");
7
8for(intl = neuronsPerLayer-1; l >= 0; l--)
9gnn.backPropagation(l);
10
11gnn.optimizer("adam", 0.01, 0.9, 0.999);
12}
13}
Listing 1: GraphSAGE Training Function in Morphling
A. Compiler Overview
Morphling builds upon the StarPlat [12] compiler fron-
tend, reusing its parser and initial IR construction for
graph topology operations. Since StarPlat was designed for
static analytics, Morphling extends this infrastructure with
learning-specific state—gradients, trainable parameters, and
optimizer metadata—allowing the compiler to represent full
forward–backward GNN pipelines.
Listing 1 illustrates the resulting high-level specification.
During compilation, these constructs are lowered into a
backend-neutral IR, where Morphling schedules the training
loop, manages intermediate buffers, and associates each layer
with the appropriate compute and communication operators.
Rather than emitting low-level code directly, the compiler
synthesizes calls into Morphling’s architecture-aware kernel
library, enabling backend specialization without exposing
complexity to the user.
•gnn.forwardPass(l, "SAGE", "Max"):
Binds layerlto the aggregation and transformation
operators instantiated for the target backend’s execution
model.
•gnn.backPropagation(l): Marks the backward
boundary for layerl, allowing the compiler to manage
5
gradient buffers more efficiently and keep memory usage
under control.
•gnn.optimizer(): Integrates the chosen update
rule (e.g., Adam) into the synthesized training loop, con-
necting gradient computation with parameter updates
without interpreter overhead.
This architecture lets the compiler manage control flow
and memory lifecycles while delegating computation to
highly optimized backend primitives, combining programma-
bility with portable performance across CPU, GPU, and
distributed environments.
GNN Algorithm
Specification
Semantic Analyzer
Code Generator
Symbol Table
Abstract Syntax
tree
StarPlat Compiler
Dataset
Number of
Layers
Algorithm(SAGE, GCN, GIN)
Aggregation(Sum, Mean)
Optimizer(ADAM, SGD)
OpenMP MPICUDA
Lexical and syntacticalanalyser
Fig. 1: Code Generation framework of Morphling
B. Sparsity-Aware Execution Engine
Most GNN systems exploit graph sparsity but treat node
features as dense tensors. This assumption is suboptimal for
real-world workloads where features are intrinsically sparse
(e.g., text embeddings). Morphling implements adual-path
execution enginethat inspects feature statistics at load time
and selects the optimal execution strategy—dispatching either
to high-throughput dense kernels or memory-efficient sparse
primitives.
a) Sparsity Decision Model.:LetX∈R N×F denote
the input feature matrix. The runtime computes the feature
sparsitys= 1− nnz(X)
N·F during data loading. The decision
to switch from dense to sparse execution is guided by the
hardware’sEfficiency Ratio(γ).
Letη dense andη sparse represent the measured sustained
throughput (FLOPs/s) of the dense GEMM and sparse SpMM
kernels, respectively. The sparse path provides a speedup
when the reduction in algorithmic work outweighs the lower
sustained throughput of sparse kernels (due to irregular
memory access). Formally, the sparse path is optimal when:
s >1−γ,whereγ= ηsparse
ηdense
(1)
On modern CPU architectures and GPUs, dense GEMM
is highly optimized, whereas SpMM is bound by indirect
memory access latency. Empirical profiling on our testbed
reveals that optimized SpMM sustains approximately20%of
the dense baseline throughput (γ≈0.20). This value is ob-
tained from offline microbenchmarks and serves as a default
heuristic rather than a per-run calibration. Consequently,
Morphling utilizes a tunable thresholdτ≈0.80. Ifs≥τ, the
system activates the sparse backend; otherwise, it defaults to
the dense path. To our knowledge, existing GNN frameworks
do not perform dense–sparse switching for feature matrices.
b) Static Path Selection:To minimize runtime overhead,
the sparsity check is performed once outside the training
loop.
•Dense Path (s < τ):The system retains the row-major
layout ofXand binds theforwardPassdirective to
vendor-optimized BLAS calls (e.g.,cblas_sgemmor
cublasSgemm).
•Sparse Path (s≥τ):The runtime materializes a Com-
pressed Sparse Row (CSR) format for the forward pass
and a Compressed Sparse Column (CSC) format for the
backward pass. The overhead of this format conversion
(O(nnz)) is incurred only once during initialization and
is amortized over many epochs typical in GNN training.
c) Backend-Specialized Primitives.:When the sparse path
is active, Morphling dispatches to custom kernels designed
to maximize bandwidth utilization for irregular accesses:
•Forward (X csr ×W):On CPUs, we employ acache-
tiled SpMMkernel. The weight matrixWis loaded into
L1 cache in blocks of sizeT tile, and the sparse feature
rows are streamed through these blocks using vectorized
fused multiply-add (FMA) instructions. This maximizes
temporal locality forWwhile handling the irregularity
ofX.
•Backward (Y×W T ):To support gradient computation,
we utilize the pre-computed CSC view ofX. This allows
the backward kernel to iterate over feature columns
efficiently, accumulating partial gradients into thread-
local buffers before a final reduction, thereby avoiding
atomic contention on the shared weight gradient matrix.
d) Crossover Condition 1 (Efficiency Ratio Threshold).:We
define the decision boundary based on the minimization of
Time-to-Solution. Let the algorithmic work (FLOPs) for dense
and sparse kernels beW dense = 2NF HandW sparse ≈2(1−
s)NF H, respectively. We model the execution time asT=
W/η, whereηrepresents the measured effective throughput
(FLOPs/s).
Derivation.The sparse path is beneficial whenT sparse <
6
Algorithm 1Sparsity-Aware Execution Engine
Input:FeaturesX∈R N×F , WeightsW, Thresholdτ≈0.80
Output:OutputT, GradientsdW
Phase 1: Runtime Analysis & Lowering▷(Once at load)
1:procedureInitialize(X, τ)
2:s←1−nnz(X)/(N·F)
3:ifs≥τthen▷Efficiency check (γ)
4:Mode←Sparse
5:X csr ←DenseToCSR(X)
6:X csc ←DenseToCSC(X)▷For backward pass
7:else
8:Mode←Dense
9:end if
10:end procedure
Phase 2: Execution▷(Per-Epoch)
11:procedureForward(W)
12:ifMode==Sparsethen
13:returnSpMM_Tiled(X csr, W)
14:else
15:returnGEMM(X, W)▷Vendor BLAS
16:end if
17:end procedure
18:procedureBackward(G)
19:ifMode==Sparsethen
20:returnSpMM_Col(X csc, G)▷Conflict-free
21:else
22:returnGEMM T (X, G)
23:end if
24:end procedure
Tdense:
Wsparse
ηsparse
< Wdense
ηdense
(2)
2(1−s)NF H
ηsparse
< 2NF H
ηdense
(3)
1−s
ηsparse
< 1
ηdense
(4)
Letγ=η sparse/ηdense be theEfficiency Ratio, capturing the
relative hardware utilization of irregular vs. regular kernels.
Rearranging terms yields:
s >1−γ(5)
Interpretation.The thresholdτ= 1−γis fully determined
by the hardware’s ability to handle irregularity. For example,
our offline profiling shows that sparse kernels achieve≈20%
of dense throughput (γ≈0.20), yielding a theoretical
crossover ats >0.80.Note:While the work termsWmodel
algorithmic FLOPs, the efficiency ratioγexplicitly absorbs
non-algorithmic inefficiencies (e.g., irregular memory access,
load imbalance, and cache stalls), making the model robust
to micro-architectural variance.
C. CPU Backend: Latency-Hiding Micro-Kernels
Morphling lowers GNN training to a high-performance
CPU backend explicitly targeting the bottlenecks of CSR-
based SpMM on modern x86 servers. Two architectural
observations motivate our design. First, sparse adjacency
induces irregular memory accesses that defeat hardware
prefetchers, causing frequent cache and TLB misses. Second,
when node feature dimensionalityFis large, naive neighbor-
wise accumulation traverses full feature vectors for each
edge. This leads to poor cache reuse and vector lane under-
utilization. To address these issues, Morphling uses acache-
tiled, software-prefetched SpMM kernelcoupled with dynamic
scheduling. The resulting kernels map naturally onto the 64-
byte cache lines and 512-bit ZMM registers of the target AVX-
512 architecture.
a) Cache-Aware Feature Tiling.:The sparse aggregation
kernel employs afeature-tiledloop nest that operates over
the column dimension in contiguous blocks. To eliminate the
overhead of runtime loop bound checks, Morphling leverages
compile-time template specialization to fix the tile widthT.
In our backend, the kernel is instantiated withT= 32(FP32),
producing a 128-byte tile—equal in size to two 512-bit AVX-
512 vectors—which promotes high SIMD lane utilization.
ResolvingTat compile time enables the backend compiler to
apply constant folding, fully unroll the reduction loop, and
generate packedvfmaddmicro-ops. The 128-byte tile also
aligns cleanly with sequential cache-line access, helping the
hardware prefetcher maintain a steady stream of feature data
into L1/L2.
For a given target nodeuand tile offsetk, the generated
kernel:
1)Register Init:Zeroes a vector accumulator (ZMM reg-
ister) for the current tile.
2)Streamed Load:Iterates over the CSR neighbor list;
for each neighborv, loads the contiguous feature block
starting atX[v, k].
3)Fused Math:Performs a vectorized Fused Multiply-Add
(FMA) of the neighbor tile, scaled by the edge weight,
into the accumulator.
4)Write-Back:Stores the completed embedding tile to the
outputY[u, k].
This layout ensures the inner loop to get packedvfmadd
operations, maximizing floating-point pipeline utilization.
Tiling increases temporal reuse of neighbor features and
aligns memory traffic to cache-line boundaries, which is
critical for saturating memory bandwidth.
b) Software-Pipelined Prefetching.:To hide DRAM la-
tency induced by irregular neighbor accesses, the kernel is-
sues explicit software prefetch instructions. During neighbor
iterationi, the kernel issues aprefetcht0hint for the
feature address of neighbori+D. Morphling targets the
contiguous tile region, enabling the cache hierarchy to bring
the relevant 64-byte lines into L1/L2 before consumption.
The lookahead distance is tuned (defaultD= 8) such that
the arithmetic intensity of the intervening FMA operations
hides the memory latency. This setup reduces Last-Level
Cache (LLC) misses and prevents pipeline stalls. To avoid
cache pollution, prefetching is conditionally guarded for
low-degree nodes where the setup overhead outweighs the
latency benefit.
c) Dynamic Scheduling.:To mitigate load imbalance
from power-law degree distributions, Morphling uses the
outer node loop to an OpenMP parallel region with a dynamic
schedule (e.g.,schedule(dynamic,64)). This strategy
hands out fine-grained work chunks to threads at runtime,
7
Algorithm 2Cache-Tiled SpMM Kernel (CPU)
Input:GraphG(CSR), FeaturesX, Tile WidthT
Output:Output EmbeddingY
Phase 1: Initialization
1:Y[0. . . N·F]←0▷Parallel Bulk Zero via SIMD
Phase 2: Tiled Aggregation
2:foreach nodeu∈0. . . N−1in parallel do▷OpenMP
Dynamic Schedule
3:forei= row_ptr[u]torow_ptr[u+ 1]do▷Neighbor
Loop
4:v←col_idx[ei];w←val[ei]
5:ifei+D <row_ptr[u+ 1]then▷Software
Prefetching
6:v next ←col_idx[ei+D]
7:PrefetchL1(X[v next,:])
8:end if
9:forf= 0toFstepTdo▷Feature Tile Loop
10:y reg ←LoadZMM(Y[u, f:f+T])
11:x reg ←LoadZMM(X[v, f:f+T])
12:y reg ←VFMADD(y reg,x reg, w)▷Fused
Multiply-Add
13:StoreZMM(Y[u, f:f+T],y reg)
14:end for
15:end for
16:end for
ensuring that heavily connected hubs do not stall the worker
threads. The dense GEMM path is delegated to vendor-
optimized BLAS (e.g., Intel MKL), while the sparse path par-
allelizes across nodes (row-wise) for forward aggregation and
across feature columns for gradient computation, structuring
the execution to avoid atomic write conflicts by design.
D. CUDA Backend
The CUDA backend employs a throughput-oriented exe-
cution model that aims to achieve high effective memory
bandwidth utilization. Morphling dispatches operations to a
library of custom CUDA kernels that map graph primitives
directly onto the GPU thread hierarchy, prioritizing memory
coalescing and minimal intermediate allocation. While the
Block-per-Row (BPR) mapping is a standard strategy for
sparse GPU kernels, Morphling integrates it into a unified
backend design so that the same feature-parallel decompo-
sition used on CPUs carries over to GPUs, ensuring con-
sistent execution semantics across architectures. The key
contribution of Morphling’s CUDA backend is that it unifies
dense–sparse execution and feature-parallel decomposition
across CPU and GPU targets, allowing the compiler to select
kernels automatically based on runtime sparsity without
changing the high-level DSL.
a) Block-Parallel Row Mapping.:For the core SpMM
aggregation, Morphling adopts theBlock-per-Rowexecu-
tion strategy wherein each output nodeuis mapped to
a single CUDA thread block (blockIdx.x). Within the
block, threads parallelize the computation along the feature
dimensionFusing a block-strided loop. This mapping se-
cures two key architectural properties:
1)Reduction of Control Divergence:Since the neighbor
range (row_ptr[u]to row_ptr[u+ 1]) is identical for the
entire block, all threads within a warp execute the neigh-
Algorithm 3Atomic-Free SpMM Aggregations
Input:GraphG(CSR), InputX, Feature DimF
Output:OutputY ▷Computed without atomics
Grid-Level Parallelism
1:foreach blocku∈0. . . N−1in parallel do▷1 Block per
Node
2:start←row_ptr[u];end←row_ptr[u+ 1]
Thread-Level Parallelism
3:forf= tidtoFstepblockDimdo▷Grid-Stride Loop
4:acc←0▷Register Accumulator
5:forei= starttoenddo▷Lockstep Neighbor Scan
6:v←col_idx[ei];w←val[ei]
7:acc←acc +w·X[v, f]▷Coalesced Read
8:end for
9:Y[u, f]←acc▷Conflict-Free Write
10:end for
11:end for
bor traversal loop in lockstep. This structural uniformity
removes the degree-induced divergence penalties that
affect thread-per-node mappings.
2)Atomic-Free Accumulation:Each thread computes a
disjoint set of feature indicesY[u, f+k·stride], accu-
mulating partial results in thread-local registers before
a single write-back to global memory. By ensuring no
two threads update the same output element, the kernel
avoids the high-latency atomic operations required by
scatter-gather designs.
Although this mapping can expose inter-block load imbal-
ance due to power-law degree distributions, real-world GNN
workloads offer thousands of independent rows per launch.
This allows the SM scheduler to effectively distribute blocks,
overlapping short-running leaf blocks with long-running hub
blocks to maintain device occupancy.
b) Implicit-Transpose Gradient (Backward Pass).:Stan-
dard frameworks typically materialize a Transposed (CSC)
copy of the sparse feature matrix to compute weight gradi-
ents (dW=X T G). While effective for compute throughput,
this doubles the memory footprint of the graph structure.
Morphling adopts a memory-centric engineering trade-off:
instead of materializing the CSC, we employ an Implicit-
Transpose Kernel. The backend iterates over the original
CSR structure. For each non-zero entry, threads compute
partial gradients and scatter them to the weight gradient
matrix usingatomicAdd. While this introduces atomic
contention, it allows gradients to be computed in-place. This
technique, combined with the fusion of message passing
(avoidingO(|E|)intermediate tensors), drives the significant
peak memory reduction observed in our evaluation, enabling
the training of massive graphs on commodity GPUs where
capacity is the primary bottleneck.
E. MPI Backend
Real-world graph datasets frequently exceed the memory
capacity of a single node, necessitating distributed GNN
training. Morphling addresses this requirement through an
MPI-based backend that partitions both computation and
data across machines while preserving the DSL’s high-level
8
programming model. The runtime applies a hierarchical par-
titioner to construct balanced subgraphs, materializes local
and ghost-node views, and generates the communication
schedules required for aggregation and gradient synchroniza-
tion. During training, Morphling overlaps inter-node com-
munication with computation using non-blocking collectives
and point-to-point exchanges, enabling scalable execution
without exposing low-level MPI details to the user.
1) Data Partitioner:The performance of distributed GNN
training is governed by two conflicting objectives: minimiz-
ing theedge-cut ratio(to reduce communication volume)
and minimizingcomputational imbalance(to prevent strag-
gler effects). Standard partitioning libraries, such as METIS,
typically optimize for vertex-count balance. This approach
often fails to account for the power-law degree distributions
inherent in real-world graphs, where a partition with equal
vertex counts can still suffer from severe computational
imbalance if one rank processes a disproportionate number
of high-degree hubs.
To address this, Morphling implements an Adaptive Hier-
archical Partitioning engine (Algorithm 4) that treats parti-
tioning as a constraint satisfaction problem with progres-
sively relaxing constraints. The engine operates in three
distinct phases:
1)Phase I: Topology-Aware Minimization.The system
first attempts to solve thek-way partitioning problem
using METIS to minimize edge-cuts subject to a strict load
imbalance constraintϵ= 1.03. We prioritize the SHEM
(Sorted Heavy Edge Matching) coarsening strategy to
maximize local neighborhood preservation. If convergence
fails—often due to disconnected components or small-
world structures—the system automatically relaxes the
imbalance tolerance (ϵ→1.20) and switches to recur-
sive bisection, which exhibits higher stability on smaller,
irregular graphs.
2)Phase II: Component-Aware Bin Packing.If topo-
logical partitioning fails to converge, the system detects
disconnected subgraphs (connected components) via BFS
traversal. It then employs aBest-Fit Decreasingbin-
packing heuristic: components are sorted by size (|V C|)
and assigned to partitions to minimize the variance in
partition sizes:
min
X
p
|Vp − ¯V| 2 (6)
This phase ensures that naturally dense subgraphs remain
local to a single rank, reducing cross-partition communi-
cation for those regions.
3)Phase III: Load-Aware Greedy Fallback.For patho-
logical graphs where topological cuts are infeasible (e.g.,
massive star graphs with high-degree hubs), Morphling
falls back to a greedy degree-based strategy. Vertices are
sorted by degree (dv) in descending order and assigned to
the partition with the minimum current weight. Crucially,
unlike standard approaches that balance based on vertex
count (weight p =|V p|), this phase explicitly balances
TABLE I: Comparison of Partitioning Strategies
Strategy Primary
Objective
Time Dominant
Cost
METIS Edge-Cut Min.O(|E|)Multilevel
Coarsening
Component ConnectivityO(|V|+|E|)Graph
Traversal
Greedy Load BalanceO(|V|log|V|)Degree Sorting
Note:|V|: Nodes,|E|: Edges. METIS time varies by configuration.
Algorithm 4Hierarchical Constraint Relaxation Partitioning
Input:GraphG(V, E), Partitionsk
Output:Partition MapP:V→ {0, . . . , k−1}
1:Phase I: Topology-Aware Minimization
2:opts←InitMetis(SHEM,ϵ= 1.03)
3:status←MetisKWay(G, k, opts)
4:ifstatus̸=OKthen
5:opts.ϵ←1.20▷Relax Imbalance Constraint
6:status←MetisRecursive(G, k, opts)
7:end if
8:ifstatus=OKthen
9:returnP
10:end if
11:Phase II: Component Bin Packing
12:Comps←FindComponents(G)
13:if|Comps|>1then
14:SortCompsby size descending
15:W eights[0. . . k]←0
16:forC∈Compsdo
17:p←arg min(W eights)▷Best-Fit Assignment
18:P[v]←p,∀v∈C
19:W eights[p]←Weights[p] +|C|
20:end for
21:returnP
22:end if
23:Phase III: Load-Aware Greedy Fallback
24:// Optimizes Pdeg(v)instead of|V|
25:Nodes←SortVby Degree descending
26:W eights[0. . . k]←0
27:forv∈Nodesdo
28:p←arg min(W eights)
29:P[v]←p
30:W eights[p]←Weights[p] +deg(v) + 1
31:end for
32:returnP
computational load:
weightp =
X
v∈P
dv (7)
By distributing high-degree hubs first, this strategy pre-
vents the formation of “straggler partitions” that would
otherwise bottleneck the synchronous distributed barrier.
2) Distributed Runtime Implementation:The Morphling
MPI backend is architected as a Bulk Synchronous Parallel
(BSP) system with explicit communication-computation over-
lap. To mitigate the high latency of distributed interconnects,
the runtime employs a split-phase communication model for
both feature synchronization and gradient aggregation.
1)Local-Global Address Translation.To support efficient
sparse operations without expensive hash lookups during
9
the training loop, the runtime materializes a thread-safe
Global-to-Local (G2L)mapping. Each rank maintains a
contiguous memory space where local nodes[0, N local)
are followed immediately by ghost nodes. This layout
enables the SpMM kernels to operate on dense, contiguous
index ranges, permitting the usage of AVX-512 vectoriza-
tion on the local feature tensors.
2)Asynchronous Halo Exchange.Feature synchroniza-
tion relies on non-blocking point-to-point primitives. As
seen in theexchange_ghostroutine, we employ a
multi-stage protocol:
•Parallel Packing:OpenMP threads gather non-
contiguous features from the embedding table into
pre-allocated send buffers.
•Non-Blocking Issue:Requests are dispatched via
MPI_Isend/MPI_Irecv, allowing the network
interface controller (NIC) to handle data transfer while
the CPU performs initialization for the forward pass.
•Wait-Free Unpacking:Received data is unpacked directly
into the ghost region of the feature matrix, making it
immediately available for aggregation.
3)Pipelined Backward Propagation.A critical op-
timization in Morphling is the masking of global
synchronization latency. Standard distributed imple-
mentations often block immediately after comput-
ing weight gradients. In contrast, Morphling utilizes
aGradient Communication Pipeline(implemented in
backward_layer_pipelined):
a)ComputedW:The kernel calculates local weight gra-
dientsdW (l)
local using the transposed input features.
b)Issue Reduction:The runtime immediately issues a
non-blockingMPI_Iallreduce.
c)Overlap (dX):While the reduction traverses the net-
work fabric, the CPU concurrently computes the gra-
dients with respect to the input activations (dX (l−1)).
This operation typically dominates the layer execution
time, effectively hiding the cost of parameter synchro-
nization.
d)Synchronize:The runtime callsMPI_Waitonly after
the input gradient computation completes, ensuring the
optimizer receives the fully aggregated global gradients.
4)Vectorized Optimizer.Parameter updates are
executed via a custom AVX-optimized kernel
(adam_update_vectorized). Unlike frameworks
that rely on Python-level loops or external tensor libraries
for optimization, Morphling keeps model weights in C++
memory. It applies fused momentum and variance updates
via SIMD pragmas immediately after the synchronization
barrier, minimizing memory traffic and preventing cache
thrashing.
3) Communication Complexity Analysis:To rigorize the ne-
cessity of the multi-objective partitioning strategy described
in Section IV-E1, we formulate the theoretical execution
cost of the distributed training loop derived from our MPI
implementation.
LetG= (V, E)be partitioned acrossPranks. The wall-
clock time for a single training epoch,T epoch, is bounded by
the slowest rank (the straggler):
Tepoch = max
p∈{0...P−1}

T(p)
comp +T (p)
comm_halo +T (p)
comm_grad

(8)
1) Computational Cost (T (p)
comp):The dominant operation
is the Sparse Matrix-Matrix multiplication (SpMM) in the
aggregation phase. As shown in our kernel implementation,
this scales linearly with the number of local edges:
T(p)
comp ∝
X
v∈V (p)
local
deg(v)×F(9)
whereFis the feature dimensionality. This explicitly justi-
fiesPhase III (Greedy Fallback)of our partitioner. Stan-
dard partitioning balances|V local|, but Morphling optimizesPdeg(v), ensuring thatT (p)
comp is uniform across ranks.
2) Halo Exchange Cost (T (p)
comm_halo):Feature synchroniza-
tion requires point-to-point transfers of ghost node embed-
dings. Utilizing the LogP model, the cost is:
T(p)
comm_halo ≈
X
r̸=p

α+β· |V (p,r)
halo | ·F

(10)
where|V (p,r)
halo |is the number of boundary nodes shared
between rankpandr. This term is directly proportional to
theEdge-Cutmetric. This justifiesPhase I (METIS)of our
partitioner, which explicitly minimizes P|Ecut|to reduce
bandwidth pressure (βterm).
3) Gradient Aggregation (T (p)
comm_grad):Weight gradients
are synchronized viaMPI_Allreduce. Assuming a Ring-
AllReduce algorithm:
T(p)
comm_grad ≈2(P−1)α+ 2 P−1
P β|W|(11)
Since the model size|W|is constant and typically small for
GNNs, this term is negligible compared to halo exchange
for large graphs, allowing our system to focus optimization
efforts on the data-dependent terms (T comp andT halo).
V. Experimental Evaluation
A. Datasets
We evaluate Morphling on ten real-world graph datasets
detailed in Table II. These benchmarks were selected to
span a broad spectrum of topological characteristics, ranging
from small, dense citation networks (e.g.,Corafull,Physics) to
large-scale, sparse social and e-commerce graphs (e.g.,Reddit,
AmazonProducts).
The datasets exhibit diverse properties that stress different
components of the training pipeline:
•Scale Variance:Graph sizes range from 19K to 2.4M
nodes and up to 264M edges, allowing us to evaluate
throughput scaling from cache-resident workloads to
memory-bound scenarios.
•Feature Dimensionality:Feature widths range from 50
to 61,278 (NELL), testing the system’s ability to handle
both topology-bound and feature-bound computation.
•Sparsity Regimes:We include graphs with varying
degrees of feature sparsity and edge density to validate
the effectiveness of our sparsity-aware execution engine.
10
TABLE II: Dataset Statistics
Dataset Nodes Edges Features Classes
Corafull 19,793 126,842 8,710 70
Physics 34,493 495,924 8,415 5
PPI 56,944 1,612,348 50 121
NELL 65,755 251,550 61,278 186
Flickr 88,250 899,756 500 7
Reddit 232,965 114,615,892 602 41
Yelp 716,847 13,954,819 300 100
AmazonProducts 1,569,960 264,339,468 200 107
ogbn-arxiv 169,343 1,166,243 128 40
ogbn-products 2,449,029 61,859,140 100 47
All experiments were conducted on the full datasets.
Notably, theAmazonProductsgraph (264M edges) exceeds
the memory capacity of standard PyG implementations on
our testbed. Consequently, we report PyG as Out-of-Memory
(OOM) for this benchmark, highlighting Morphling’s superior
memory efficiency.
B. Hardware and Software Configuration
All experiments were conducted on thePARAM Rudra
supercomputer at the High Performance Computing and
Data Centre (HPCE), IIT Madras. The cluster employs a
Lustre parallel file system for high-throughput data access
and uses SLURM for resource management. The specific
configurations are as follows:
•CPU Testbed:Compute nodes are equipped with dual-
socket Intel Xeon Gold 6240R (Cascade Lake) processors
(48 cores per node) and 192 GB of DDR4 system memory.
•GPU Testbed:Accelerated nodes contain dual NVIDIA
A100-PCIE GPUs (40 GB HBM2e) and dual Intel Xeon
Gold 6240R processors with 192 GB of DDR4 RAM. To
mitigate I/O bottlenecks, each node is equipped with an
800 GB local NVMe SSD for caching graph partitions.
•Distributed Interconnect:Nodes are connected via
a low-latency, high-bandwidth InfiniBand NDR fabric,
which is utilized by our MPI backend for gradient and
feature synchronization.
•Software Environment:Nodes run Linux (Alma 8.9).
Morphling is compiled with GCC 9.4 and CUDA 11.8.
We compare againstPyTorch Geometric (v2.6.1)and
DGL (v2.1.0)using PyTorch 2.0.0 as the backend.
•Model Architecture:For all benchmarks, we utilize
a 3-layer Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) with a
hidden dimension of 32.
C. Morphling on CPU
We evaluate Morphling under full-batch CPU training and
compare its sustained throughput against PyG and DGL.
Figure 2 reports relative speedups, while Figure 3 presents
absolute per-epoch latencies.
1) Metric Definition:We measuresustained per-epoch
training time, which includes the forward pass, backward
pass, and optimizer update. Morphling’s one-time code gen-
eration and PyTorch/DGL JIT warm-up are excluded, as these
TABLE III: Peak System Memory Consumption (GB). Mor-
phling maintains a compact footprint, whereas PyG exhibits
excessive memory expansion due to intermediate tensor
materialization.
Dataset Morphling PyG DGL
Reddit4.4048.12 8.75
Yelp2.5914.01 5.04
AmazonProducts9.03140.24 † 25.10
ogbn-arxiv 0.57 1.140.34
ogbn-products7.0057.12 11.84
† Failure Case:PyG failed to process the full AmazonProducts graph due to
memory exhaustion (OOM>192GB). The reported 140.24 GB is a lower-
bound measurement taken on a 75% subsampled graph.
costs are amortized over long training runs and do not affect
steady-state throughput.
2) Performance Analysis:Morphling achieves the highest
throughput on 9 of the 10 datasets. On average, it delivers
a20.21×speedup over PyG and8.20×over DGL. The
only exception isReddit, where dense feature vectors favor
DGL’s MKL-backed dense kernels; here Morphling achieves
a competitive0.23 s/epochversus DGL’s0.19 s/epoch.
On sparse or high-dimensional graphs, however, Mor-
phling holds a decisive advantage. For instance,NELLexhibits
99.21% feature sparsity, incur redundant dense operations
on mostly zero-valued entries. Morphling’s sparsity-aware
dispatch reduces epoch latency by43.52×relative to DGL.
Similarly, onAmazonProducts, Morphling completes an epoch
in0.36 s, whereas PyG fails to execute due to memory
exhaustion (OOM) and DGL requires0.80 s.
These results validate the design principles behind Mor-
phling:
1)Sparse vs. Dense Regimes.Morphling detects feature
sparsity (experimentally tuned thresholds≈0.85)
and routes computation to a specialized tiled SpMM
kernel, avoiding the redundant FLOPs incurred by dense
GEMMs.
2)Kernel Specialization.Morphling’s AVX-
512–optimized kernels maintain contiguous memory
access and avoid the pointer-chasing overhead of generic
sparse-tensor routines (e.g., PyG’s scatter/gather). This
reduces per-epoch latency from seconds (8.69 s on
Reddit for PyG) to sub-second performance.
In summary, while dense optimization gives DGL a slight
edge on the Reddit graph, Morphling consistently provides
superior throughput across the broader spectrum of real-
world sparse and irregular graphs.
D. Morphling on GPU
We evaluate Morphling on the NVIDIA A100 under full-
batch training. Figure 4 reports relative speedups, while
Figure 5 shows per-epoch latencies.
1) Throughput Analysis:Morphling provides substantial
GPU throughput gains across all datasets, achieving an
average15.48×speedup over PyG and4.40×over DGL.
The largest improvements arise on sparse or irregular graphs.
OnAmazonComputers, Morphling reduces epoch time from
11
Fig. 2: Morphling speedup over PyG and DGL on CPU
Fig. 3: Per-epoch training time of Morphling, PyG, and DGL
on CPU
17.26 s(PyG) and13.56 s(DGL) to0.26 s, corresponding to
66.28×and52.06×speedups.
A critical case isAmazonProducts. PyG fails on the full
dataset due to GPU memory exhaustion, so we report PyG on
a55% subsampled graph. Even under this favorable condi-
tion, PyG requires140.93 s/epoch, while DGL processes the
full graph in41.73 s. Morphling completes the full dataset
in15.26 s, providing a2.73×speedup over DGL and an
effective9.23×speedup over PyG despite the subsampling
advantage.
On bandwidth-intensive graphs such asReddit, Morphling
continues to outperform both baselines, achieving a2.23×
speedup over DGL and14.99×over PyG.
2) Architectural Attribution:Morphling’s GPU gains stem
from two factors: (1) aBlock-Per-Rowkernel that ensures
warp-coalesced feature access and avoids PyG’s irregular
scatter/gather patterns, and (2) fused aggregation kernels
that eliminate edge-proportional message tensors created by
PyG and DGL. Together, these optimizations reduce global
memory traffic and enable execution on large graphs where
baselines either stall or OOM.
E. Morphling on MPI
We evaluate Morphling in a multi-node dis-
tributed setting and compare its performance with
pytorch_geometric.distributed(PyG) and
DGL. Figure 6 reports relative speedups, and Figure 7
presents per-epoch latencies.
1) Throughput Analysis:Morphling is optimized for mas-
sive, communication-intensive graphs, and its advantages
Fig. 4: Morphling speedup over PyG and DGL on GPU
Fig. 5: Per-epoch training time of Morphling, PyG, and DGL
on GPU
become most pronounced at scale. OnAmazonProducts, for
example, PyG and DGL require3880.4 sand1824.4 s
per epoch, respectively. In contrast, Morphling completes an
epoch in126.9 s, yielding a30.58×speedup over PyG and
14.38×over DGL. Similarly, onReddit, Morphling reduces
epoch time to51.53 s, achieving speedups of16.19×(vs.
PyG) and7.16×(vs. DGL).
On medium-sized graphs (e.g., NELL, Yelp), Morphling
maintains 2–13×gains over both frameworks. However, on
small datasets (e.g., PPI, Flickr), the fixed overhead of the
distributed runtime dominates the short computation time,
resulting in parity or slight performance regression compared
to DGL’s fused kernels. Averaged across all benchmarks,
Morphling achieves a6.22×speedup over PyG and5.65×
over DGL.
2) Architectural Attribution:Morphling’s distributed scal-
ability stems from two design choices: (1) ADegree-Aware
Hierarchical Partitionerthat balances computational load
(Pdeg(v)) rather than just vertex counts, preventing strag-
gler ranks on power-law graphs. (2) APipelined Runtime
that masks synchronization latency. By overlapping halo
exchange with forward-pass preparation and overlapping
weight gradient reduction with backward-pass computation,
Morphling effectively hides the communication costs that
bottleneck standard synchronous implementations.
F. Memory Behavior Analysis
Table III summarizes peak system memory consumption.
Morphling consistently maintains the smallest footprint, en-
abling full-graph training even on datasets where standard
frameworks exceed hardware capacity.
12
Fig. 6: Morphling speedup over PyG and DGL on MPI
Fig. 7: Per-epoch training time of Morphling, PyG, and DGL
on MPI
1) Capacity and Scalability:The most critical disparity
arises onAmazonProducts. Morphling trains on the full graph
using only9.03 GB. In contrast, PyG exceeds the 192 GB
system limit and fails to initialize. Even when the dataset
is downsampled to 75%, PyG still consumes140.24 GB.
DGL successfully runs the full graph but requires25.10 GB,
nearly2.8×more than Morphling. Similar trends onReddit
andogbn-productsdemonstrate that Morphling’s memory
efficiency remains stable as graph size increases.
2) Complexity Analysis:The memory gap is structural
and follows directly from the execution models. PyG’s
gather–scatterparadigm materializes source and des-
tination feature tensors of size[|E| ×F], producing a peak
memory cost of:
MPyG ≈ O(|E| ×F) +O(|V| ×F).(12)
On dense graphs, the|E| ×Fterm dominates and leads to
the observed OOM failures.
Morphling avoids edge-tensor materialization entirely. Its
fused C++ kernels accumulate messages directly into node
embeddings without constructing intermediate[|E| ×F]
buffers, bounding memory usage by:
MMorphling ≈ O(|V| ×F).(13)
This yields a reduction factor that grows proportionally with
the graph’s average degree—up to15.5×on dense graphs
such asAmazonProducts—while maintaining near parity on
smaller or moderate-density datasets likeogbn-arxiv. DGL
falls between the two extremes due to its use of multiple
adjacency formats (CSR/CSC) and per-layer message buffers,
producing a memory footprint larger than Morphling’s but
lower than PyG’s.
Fig. 8: Peak memory comparison between Pyg, DGL, and
Morphling
Morphling avoids allocating such edge-sized feature
buffers. Instead, it operates directly on node features without
materializing per-edge feature tensors, which eliminates the
dominant memory term present in PyG. This design enables
Morphling to maintain low peak memory usage even on
graphs with tens or hundreds of millions of edges, as re-
flected in the dramatic savings observed across the evaluated
datasets.
VI. Conclusion
Existing GNN frameworks face a persistent mismatch be-
tween the irregular, sparse structure of graph workloads and
the dense, uniform execution models of modern accelerators.
We presentedMorphling, a cross-platform synthesis frame-
work that addresses this gap through architecture-aware
specialization. By unifying a sparsity-aware execution engine,
fused kernel synthesis, and a pipelined distributed runtime,
Morphling substantially reduces the memory overheads and
synchronization costs that constrain state-of-the-art systems.
Our evaluation shows that these design choices translate
into decisive performance gains. On single-node CPUs and
GPUs, Morphling improves training throughput by an aver-
age of20.21×and15.48×, respectively, with peak speedups
reaching66×on sparse workloads. Its memory-efficient ker-
nel design reduces peak footprint by up to15.5×, enabling
full-graph training on large datasets such asAmazonProducts
within typical cluster node memory budgets—where PyG and
DGL either fail or fall back to subsampled execution. In
distributed settings, Morphling’s degree-balanced partitioner
and split-phase communication pipeline scale effectively
across nodes, outperforming PyG by up to30×. Together,
these results position Morphling as a robust foundation for
next-generation, scale-out graph learning systems.
VII. Future Work
The future extensions of Morphling span three directions.
First, deepening the compiler stack withautomated sched-
ule tuningandcross-layer operator fusionwill broaden
13
support for emerging architectures such as attention-based
GNNs. Second, enablingmixed-precisionand quantized
execution (FP16/BF16/INT8) can further increase throughput
and reduce memory use on modern Tensor Core accelera-
tors. Finally, expanding backend coverage toheterogeneous
accelerators(FPGAs, IPUs) and augmenting the distributed
runtime withtopology-aware communicationand adap-
tive partitioning will improve performance on large-scale,
hierarchical cluster environments.
References
[1] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast Graph Representation Learning with
PyTorch Geometric, ” inProc. Workshop on Representation Learning on
Graphs and Manifolds at ICLR, 2019. https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.02428
[2] M. Wang, D. Zheng, Z. Ye, Q. Gan, M. Li, X. Song, J. Zhou, C. Ma,
L. Yu, Y. Gai, T. Xiao, T. He, G. Karypis, J. Li, and Z. Zhang, “Deep
Graph Library: A Graph-Centric, Highly-Performant Package for Graph
Neural Networks, ” inarXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01315, Sept. 2019. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1909.01315
[3] Y. Wang, B. Feng, G. Li, S. Li, L. Deng, Y. Xie, and Y. Ding, “GNNAdvisor:
An Adaptive and Efficient Runtime System for GNN Acceleration on
GPUs, ” inProc. 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI), 2021, pp. 515–531. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/osdi21/presentation/wang-yuke
[4] H. Zhang, Z. Yu, G. Dai, G. Huang, Y. Ding, Y. Xie, and Y. Wang, “Un-
derstanding GNN Computational Graph: A Coordinated Computation,
IO, and Memory Perspective, ” inProc. 5th Machine Learning and Systems
Conference (MLSys), 2022, pp. 467–484. https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.09524
[5] R. Zhu, K. Zhao, H. Yang, W. Lin, C. Zhou, B. Ai, Y. Li, and J. Zhou,
“AliGraph: A Comprehensive Graph Neural Network Platform, ” inProc.
The 12th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB),
vol. 12, no. 12, 2019, pp. 2094–2105. doi:10.14778/3352063.3352127. https:
//doi.org/10.14778/3352063.3352127
[6] F. Huang, W. Zhang, K. Zhai, J. Zhu, R. Chen, W. Wu, and X. Wan,
“Euler: A System for Large-Scale Graph Analytics, ” inProc. 24th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining
(KDD), 2018, pp. 316–324. doi:10.1145/3219819.3220063. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3219819.3220063
[7] D. Zheng, C. Ma, M. Wang, J. Zhou, Q. Su, X. Song, Q. Gan, Z. Zhang,
and G. Karypis, “DistDGL: Distributed Graph Neural Network Training
for Billion-Scale Graphs, ” in10th IEEE/ACM Workshop on Irregular
Applications: Architectures and Algorithms (IA 3), 2020, pp. 36–44. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2010.05337
[8] Y. Zhang, A. Brahmakshatriya, X. Chen, L. Dhulipala, S. Kamil, S. Ama-
rasinghe, and J. Shun, “GraphIt: A High-Performance DSL for Graph
Analytics, ” inProc. 33rd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 2018. doi:10.1145/3276491.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3276491
[9] J. Shun and G. E. Blelloch, “Ligra: A Lightweight Graph Processing
Framework for Shared Memory, ” inProc. 18th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium
on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP), Feb. 23-27
2013, Shenzhen, China, pp. 135–146. doi:10.1145/2517327.2442530.
[10] M. Kulkarni, K. Pingali, B. Walter, K. Tung, and J. Hollingsworth,
“The Galois System: Optimistic Parallelization of Irregular Programs, ”
inProc. 20th IEEE International Parallel & Distributed Processing Sympo-
sium (IPDPS), 2008, pp. 1-12. https://ecommons.cornell.edu/bitstreams/
707e6678-bb5b-4dc6-b590-1b58e409d802/download
[11] X. Zhu, W. Chen, W. Zheng, and X. Ma, “Gemini: A Computation-
Centric Distributed Graph Processing System, ” inProc. 12th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI),
Savannah, GA, USA, Nov. 2016, pp. 301–316. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/osdi16/technical-sessions/presentation/zhu
[12] N. Behera, A. Kumar, E. Rajadurai T., S. Nitish, R. Pandian M., and
R. Nasre, “StarPlat: A Versatile DSL for Graph Analytics, ”Journal
of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 183, 2024, Article 104967.
doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2024.104967. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03317
[13] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin,
S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, R. Monga,
S. Moore, D. Murray, B. Steiner, P. Tucker, V. Vasudevan, P. Warden,
M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, “TensorFlow: A System for Large-
Scale Machine Learning, ” inProc. 12th USENIX Symposium on Oper-
ating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), Savannah, GA, USA,
Nov. 2016, pp. 265–283. https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/
osdi16/osdi16-abadi.pdf
[14] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Köpf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-
Performance Deep Learning Library, ” inProc. 33rd International Con-
ference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vancouver,
Canada, 2019, pp. 8024–8035. https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01703
[15] H. Guo, W. Guo, Y. Gao, R. Tang, X. He, and W. Liu, “Scale-
FreeCTR: MixCache-based Distributed Training System for CTR Mod-
els with Huge Embedding Table, ” inProc. 44th International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Re-
trieval (SIGIR ’21), July 11-15 2021, Virtual Event, Canada, 10 pages.
doi:10.1145/3404835.3462976. https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08542
[16] Y. Wu, K. Ma, Z. Cai, T. Jin, B. Li, C. Zheng, J. Cheng, and F. Yu,
“Seastar: Vertex-Centric Programming for Graph Neural Networks, ” in
Proc. ACM / IEEE European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys
’21), Apr. 26-29 2021, 17 pages. doi:10.1145/3447786.3456247. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3447786.3456247
[17] Y. Hu, Z. Ye, M. Wang, J. Yu, D. Zheng, M. Li, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang,
and Y. Wang, “FeatGraph: A Flexible and Efficient Backend for Graph
Neural Network Systems, ” inProc. IEEE/ACM International Conference
for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC),
2020. https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.11359
[18] J. Ragan-Kelley, A. Adams, S. Paris, M. Levoy, and F. Durand, “Halide:
A Language and Compiler for Optimizing Parallelism, Locality, and
Recomputation in Image Processing Pipelines, ” inProc. ACM SIGPLAN
Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI),
2013, pp. 519–530. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2491956.2462176
[19] T. Chen, T. Moreau, Z. Jiang, L. Ceze, C. Guestrin, and A. Kr-
ishnamurthy, “TVM: An Automated End-to-End Optimizing Compiler
for Deep Learning, ” inProc. 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), 2018, pp. 578–594. https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/chen
[20] F. Kjolstad, S. Kamil, S. Chou, D. Lugato, and S. Amarasinghe, “The
Tensor Algebra Compiler, ” inProc. ACM Program. Lang., vol. 1, no.
OOPSLA, Article 77, Oct. 2017. doi:10.1145/3133901. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3133901
[21] R. Baghdadi, Y. Zou, M. Shirinzadeh, P. Zhao, M. Ripeanu, T. M. Smith,
A. Sanan, R. Mullapudi, J. Ragan-Kelley, and S. Amarasinghe, “Tiramisu:
A Polyhedral Compiler for Expressing Fast and Portable Code, ” inProc.
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization
(CGO), 2019, pp. 193–205. https://doi.org/10.1109/CGO.2019.8661197
[22] N. Vasilache, O. Zinenko, T. Theodoridis, P. Goyal, Z. DeVito, W. S.
Moses, S. Verdoolaege, A. Adams, and A. Cohen, “Tensor Comprehen-
sions: Framework-Agnostic High-Performance Machine Learning Ab-
stractions, ” inProc. of the 2nd ACM/IEEE Workshop on Machine Learning
and Systems (MLSys) — Pre-print / ArXiv, 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.
04730
[23] H. C. Edwards, C. R. Trott, and D. Sunderland, “Kokkos: Enabling
manycore performance portability through polymorphic memory access
patterns, ”Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 74, no. 12,
pp. 3202–3216, Dec. 2014. doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2014.07.003. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpdc.2014.07.003
[24] D. A. Beckingsale, J. Burmark, R. Hornung, H. Jones, W. Killian, A. J.
Kunen, O. Pearce, P. Robinson, B. S. Ryujin, and T. R. W. Scogland,
“RAJA: Portable Performance for Large-Scale Scientific Applications, ”
inProc. IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Performance, Portability
and Productivity in HPC (P3HPC), 2019, pp. 71-81. https://www.osti.gov/
servlets/purl/1573949
[25] R. Reyes and V. Lomüller, “SYCL: Single-source C++ accelerator pro-
gramming, ” inAdvances in Parallel Computing, Vol. 27: Parallel Comput-
ing — On the Road to Exascale, R. T. Morris, Ed., IOS Press, 2016, pp.
673-682. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-621-7-673
[26] Intel Corporation, “Intel®oneAPI Programming Guide, ” Intel Corpora-
tion, 2025. oneAPI Documentation
[27] J. E. Stone, D. Gohara, and G. Shi, “OpenCL: A parallel programming
standard for heterogeneous computing systems, ”Computing in Science
& Engineering, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 66–73, 2010. https://doi.org/10.1109/
MCSE.2010.69
[28] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks, ” inProc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2017.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907
[29] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs, ” inProc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS),
vol. 30, 2017. https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.02216
14
[30] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
neural networks?, ” inProc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2019. https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1810.00826
[31] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Ben-
gio, “Graph attention networks, ” inProc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent.
(ICLR), 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.10903
[32] G. Karypis and V. Kumar, “A fast and high quality multilevel scheme
for partitioning irregular graphs, ”SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing,
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 359–392, 1998. doi: 10.1137/S1064827595287997.
[33] PyTorch Geometric, “Sparse tensor support, ”PyTorch Geometric Docu-
mentation. Pytorch_Geometric Documentation