Discriminative classification with generative features: bridging
Naive Bayes and logistic regression
Zachary Terner∗ Alexander Petersen† Yuedong Wang‡
November 2025
Abstract
We introduce Smart Bayes, a new classification framework that bridges generative and dis-
criminative modeling by integrating likelihood–ratio–based generative features into a logistic-
regression-style discriminative classifier. From the generative perspective, Smart Bayes relaxes
the fixed unit weights of Naive Bayes by allowing data-driven coefficients on density-ratio
features. From a discriminative perspective, it constructs transformed inputs as marginal log-
density ratios that explicitly quantify how much more likely each feature value is under one
class than another, thereby providing predictors with stronger class separation than the raw
covariates. To support this framework, we develop a spline-based estimator for univariate
log-density ratios that is flexible, robust, and computationally efficient. Through extensive
simulations and real-data studies, Smart Bayes often outperforms both logistic regression and
Naive Bayes. Our results highlight the potential of hybrid approaches that exploit generative
structure to enhance discriminative performance.
∗Corresponding author: zterner@ucsb.edu. This author was partly funded by the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship.
†Brigham Young University
‡University of California, Santa Barbara
1
arXiv:2512.01097v1  [stat.ML]  30 Nov 2025
1 Introduction
The challenge of classifying new observations into one of two (or more) classes is an old and ongoing
problem in statistics and machine learning. Many existing classifiers can be categorized as being
eithergenerativeordiscriminative. As noted by Ng and Jordan [12], generative classifiers learn
a model of the joint probabilityp(x, y),wherexrepresents the inputs andythe response, and
use Bayes’ rule to computep(y|x) to make predictions. Discriminative classifiers, however, model
p(y|x) explicitly without specifying the marginal distribution ofx. Since this approach is more
direct, these classifiers often perform better in terms of minimizing misclassification rates. Using
the generative-discriminative pair of Naive Bayes and logistic regression, Ng and Jordan suggest that
discriminative classifiers tend to have lower asymptotic errors than their generative counterparts,
but a generative classifier may approach its asymptotic error rate more quickly. Thus, Naive Bayes
may outperform logistic regression in settings of small sample sizes, but logistic regression should
perform better as sample sizes increase.
By virtue of this pairing, Naive Bayes and logistic regression are fundamentally connected. The
Naive Bayes classifier, rather than estimate the joint density of each class, invokes the factorization
theorem to factor the joint densities, conditional on class membership, into the products of assumed
independent marginals. Taking the log of this product allows one to compute the log marginal
density ratio for each feature. New observations are assigned to a class if the sum of the log density
ratios exceeds or falls below a threshold dependent on the prior class probabilities. In contrast,
logistic regression avoids computing density ratios and learns a model ofp(y|x) using the features
themselves. Building a model with logistic regression can also provide interpretations that one does
not normally gain from Naive Bayes.
In this paper, we demonstrate that incorporating generative features into a discriminative clas-
sification framework can outperform both standard Naive Bayes and conventional discriminative
methods. Specifically, our simulations and empirical experiments demonstrate that a logistic re-
gression with marginal log density ratios as features can outperform not only Naive Bayes but also
a logistic regression using the features themselves.
To build this classifier, we compute marginal log-density ratios as done in Naive Bayes. Rather
2
than applying the Naive Bayes rule directly, these ratios are entered into a logistic regression
model as features. Under this formulation, Naive Bayes arises as a special case in which all model
coefficients are fixed to one. We refer to the proposed method as Smart Bayes (SB), reflecting its
more flexible utilization of generative information. Importantly, the weights of the log density ratios
can be interpreted similarly to the coefficients in a logistic regression. This approach can also be
applied to other classification methods, such as decision trees and support vector machines, which
may similarly benefit from incorporating log-density ratios as features.
Smart Bayes can also be interpreted through the lens of the likelihood ratio. In Smart Bayes, the
original features in a logistic regression are replaced with log-transformed marginal density ratios.
These may be more discriminative than the raw inputs, since they quantify how likely it is that each
component of the observed feature vector originated from one class over the other. Therefore, they
can serve as more informative predictors for classification than the original features themselves.
To treat density ratios as features in a regression, one must first construct estimates of density
ratios. The estimation of density ratios pervades many areas of statistics, from building classification
models, outlier detection [7], changepoint detection [10], deep learning [20], and machine learning
in general [17]. See [18] for additional application areas and references regarding density ratio
estimation. We introduce a new method of estimating density ratios directly using splines, which is
based on previous techniques by Silverman and Kanamori [16, 9]. Although we use this method to
estimate marginal log density ratios, it can be applied more generally to estimate joint log density
ratios of features.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we review Naive Bayes, logistic regression,
and their relationship. In Section 3, we introduce Smart Bayes and describe some of its properties.
Section 3.2 introduces the method of direct estimation of marginal density ratios using splines,
which we use in the simulation and real data examples in Sections 4. These real data examples are
constructed using the same datasets as Ng and Jordan [12] to show Smart Bayes’s behavior relative
to Naive Bayes and logistic regression. Empirically, Smart Bayes outperforms both alternatives on
a variety of datasets. Section 5 concludes the paper with a discussion.
3
2 Logistic regression and Naive Bayes
2.1 Naive Bayes
The Bayes classifier is known to minimize misclassification rates [1, 26, 2, 8]. LetYbe our class
labels and denoteXas ourpmultivariate predictors. The Bayes classifier can be written as
ˆy= arg max
y
P(Y=y|X=x).(1)
In other words, we assign new observationsxto the class which has the maximum posterior prob-
ability [4]. In the two-class problem, whereY∈ {0,1},let
f(x) = P(Y= 1|X=x)
P(Y= 0|X=x) .(2)
The Bayes classifier assigns observations to classY= 1 iff(x)>1.In this case, we compute the
posterior conditional probabilities of the two classes and take the ratio to determine which class
has the higher posterior probability. By applying Bayes’ theorem,
f(x) = P(Y= 1)P(X=x|Y= 1)
P(Y= 0)P(X=x|Y= 0) ,(3)
where we have switched the conditioning to require a density of the data conditional on the class,
P(X=x|Y=y).The class probabilities,P(Y=y),can be estimated by computing the proportion
of instances in each class. However, the conditional probabilities in (3) can be very difficult to
estimate in practice, especially whenpis large, due to the curse of dimensionality [15].
One common assumption used to compute the joint densities in (3) is to assume that the
predictor variables are independent, conditional on class membership. Letg y(x) be the density
function ofXconditional onY=y. LetX= (X 1, . . . , Xp) andg yk be the marginal density
function ofX k conditional onY=y. By the factorization theorem, if the predictor variables are
independent conditional on the class label, we can write
f(x) = P(Y= 1)g 1(x)
P(Y= 0)g 0(x) = P(Y= 1) Qp
k=1 g1k(xk)
P(Y= 0) Qp
k=1 g0k(xk).(4)
4
Since (4) contains only products, we can take the log to convert the products into a sum. This
creates the traditional Naive Bayes classifier, which we denote asf n(x) :
fn(x) = log P(Y= 1)
P(Y= 0) +
pX
k=1
log g1k(xk)
g0k(xk).(5)
In (5), we simply need to compute the log density ratio of each marginal variable. The class label
is assigned based on whether the sum of the log density ratios and the prior probabilities is positive
(Y= 1) or negative (Y= 0).
2.2 Logistic regression
Working on the log density ratio
fl(x)≜log P(Y= 1|X=x)
P(Y= 0|X=x) (6)
directly can be justified by the exponential criterion [5]. A simple model forf l is the logistic
regression model
fl(x) =β 0 +
pX
k=1
βkxk.(7)
Instead of computing marginal density ratios, logistic regression uses the featuresx k directly to
build the function that separates the classes. The coefficientsβ k and an interceptβ 0 can be learned
as maximizers of the likelihood [6]. New observations are assigned to Class 1 if the estimate off l(x)
is above a certain threshold, and to Class 0 otherwise.
Logistic regression is considered discriminative since it directly connects the featuresx k to
P(Y|X=x). In contrast, Naive Bayes is generative since it approximates the joint probability
P(X, Y) and uses Bayes rule to calculateP(Y|X=x).Ng and Jordan show that generative
classifiers approach their asymptotic error rate more quickly than discriminative classifiers, though
discriminative classifiers have a lower asymptotic error rate [12]. Therefore, Naive Bayes is expected
to outperform logistic regression only when sample sizes are small.
Both Naive Bayes and logistic regression methods have their limitations. To approximate the
joint probability, Naive Bayes ignores any dependence between the features by (naively) assuming
5
the features are independent. The conditional independence between predictors is a strong assump-
tion that, in general, does not hold in practice. Logistic regression does not make this assumption,
but does assume a parametric model for the log odds.
3 Smart Bayes
Section 3.1 introduces the Smart Bayes method, and Section 3.2 outlines our procedure for esti-
mating the marginal log density ratio. We discuss how to interpret the coefficients in Smart Bayes
in Section 3.3.
3.1 Discriminative classifier with generative features
When the class-conditional distributions ofxare specified, the logistic regression classifier can be
written as
fl(x) = log P(Y= 1)
P(Y= 0) + log g1(x)
g0(x).(8)
From a generative perspective, logistic regression attempts to approximate the log-density ratio
using a linear combination of the original featuresx k and an intercept. The key idea of our
proposed method is that an affine function of the marginal log-density ratios may provide a more
accurate approximation tof l(x).
Define generative featuresz k = log{g1k(xk)/g0k(xk)}.When the featuresX k are mutually con-
ditionally independent, we can write
fl(x) = log P(Y= 1)
P(Y= 0) +
pX
k=1
zk,(9)
which coincides with the Naive Bayes classifierf n in 5.
To accommodate dependence among the features, the proposed Smart Bayes approach, defined
asf s below, fits the following logistic regression model with generative featuresz k:
fs(x) =α 0 +
pX
k=1
αkzk.(10)
6
The Smart Bayes method extends the Naive Bayes classifier by replacing its fixed unit coefficients
with learnable weightsα k, allowing the contribution of each generative feature to be determined
from the data. At the same time, Smart Bayes can be viewed as an extension of logistic regression,
obtained by substituting the original featuresx k with possibly more informative generative features
zk. Thus, Smart Bayes retains the strengths of both approaches by leveraging generative information
while preserving the flexibility of discriminative modeling.
As in standard logistic regression, interaction terms or higher-order transformations ofz k may
be incorporated to capture more complex relationships. Moreover, the generative featuresz k can be
used as predictors in other machine-learning classifiers, such as support vector machines or decision
trees, potentially improving performance by leveraging informative log-density-ratio features.
The Smart Bayes classifier offers a few notable properties. When both classes are Gaussian,
Smart Bayes can recover the optimal Bayes classifier in two cases: when the two classes have a
difference in means but a shared covariance, and when the two classes have different means and
different covariances, but the same variances. In general, Smart Bayes can recover the optimal
Bayes solution when the marginal density ratiosz k are all linear inx. It is additionally easy to
see that there are many cases where coefficients in the Smart Bayes classifier should not only differ
from one, but should in fact be negative. See [19] for additional details.
3.2 Direct density ratio estimation using splines
In this section, we introduce a method for estimating marginal density ratios, which are typically
unknown in practice. We extend Silverman’s method [16] to a more general model space and a
broader class of penalties. A related approach appears in [9], but the method presented here is
more general.
We estimate the conditional density ratio for each random variable inX= (X 1, . . . , Xp). For
simplicity, we omit the subscript in the following discussion. Suppose that we observe (X, Y) where
Y= 1 orY= 0, X∈ XandXis an arbitrary set. Letg 0(x) andg 1(x) denote the conditional
density ofX|Y= 0 andX|Y= 1, respectively.
7
Using Bayes’ theorem, we can write
p(x)≜P(Y= 1|X=x) = π1g1(x)
π1g1(x) +π 0g0(x) = rd(x)
1 +rd(x) ,(11)
whererrepresents the ratio of prior probabilities,π 1/π0,andd(x) represents the density ratio,
g1(x)/g0(x).
The logistic probability can be written as
η(x) = log p(x)
1−p(x) = logr+ logd(x).(12)
Given data{(x i, yi), i= 1, . . . , n}, we estimateη(x) nonparametrically as the minimizer of the
penalized likelihood:
−
nX
i=1
yiη(xi) +
nX
i=1
log(1 + expη(xi)) +λJ(η),(13)
whereηbelongs to a reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS)Hdefined on the domainX,J(η) is a
penalty, andλis a smoothing parameter [22, 23]. The choices of the model spaceXand penaltyJ(η)
depend on the domainXand prior knowledge. The assumption thatXtakes values in an arbitrary
setXallows the framework to accommodate different types of random variables in a unified manner.
For example, ifXis a univariate continuous variable with bounded support, we may takeXas the
support and chooseHto be an appropriate Sobolev space; ifXis supported onR, a thin-plate
spline space may be used instead. See [23] for additional examples of suitable model spaces. More
generally, when prior knowledge indicates that a subset of variables inXis correlated, one may
estimate their joint density rather than marginal densities for individual variables. Nevertheless, in
the remainder of this work, we focus on methods based solely on estimates of marginal densities.
Standard smoothing methods can be used to obtain the minimizer of the penalized likelihood
withy i as binary outcomes. The smoothing parameterλmay be selected using generalized cross-
validation (GCV), generalized maximum likelihood (GML), or other established criteria [23]. The
estimate of the log density ratio using the RKHS, ˆd,is defined as
ˆd(x)≜ˆη(x)−log ˆr,(14)
8
where ˆris an estimate ofr. A simple estimate is ˆr= Pn
i=1 yi/(n− Pn
i=1 yi).In comparison,
Silverman [16] justified his method via the connection between inhomogeneous Poisson processes
and density functions. He used the likelihood conditioned on sufficient statistics and treated the
sum of intensity functions as a nuisance parameter. Therefore, his method is limited to density
ratios defined on the real line. Note that the negative log-likelihood in the first two terms in (13)
has the same form as the conditional log-likelihood presented in [16]. Therefore, with the same
model space and penalty, these two approaches lead to the same estimate.
The Bayes rule based on this estimated density ratio is equivalent to nonparametric logistic
regression: the Bayes rule assigns an observation to Class 1 whenrd(x)≥1, which is equivalent to
η(x)≥0 [22]. In Smart Bayes, we estimate marginal density ratios and then fit logistic regression
models with these estimated log density ratios as features. Specifically, for multivariateX=
(X1, . . . , Xp), we first estimate marginal density ratiosd k(xk) =g 1k(xk)/g0k(xk) fork= 1, . . . , p
and then fit a logistic regression model withz k = logd k(xk) as features. Therefore, we only
need to solve (13) for univariate spline models for each marginal density ratio. Note that Bayes
rule traditionally uses the full likelihoodf(y|x)f(x) while logistic regression uses the conditional
likelihood,f(y|x).In our approach, we estimate the density ratio using the conditional likelihood
and treat the prior densityf(x) as a nuisance parameter.
3.3 Interpretation of Smart Bayes coefficients
As with standard logistic regression models, exp(αk) in the proposed Smart Bayes model represents
the hazard ratio associated with a one-unit increase in the log likelihood ratioz k. In Smart Bayes,
at% change inz k corresponds to a factor (1 +t/100) change in the likelihood or density ratio.
AssumeX|Y=yfollows an exponential family distribution,
f(x|y) = exp
θ(y)x−b(θ(y))
a(ϕ) +c(x, ϕ)

,
whereθandϕdenote the canonical and dispersion parameters. Under this model, the log density
9
ratioz(omitting the subscript) is a linear transformation ofx:
z(x) = θ(1)−θ(0)
a(ϕ) x−
 
b(θ(1))−b(θ(0))

=γx+δ,
whereγ={θ(1)−θ(0)}/a(ϕ) andδ=b(θ(0))−b(θ(1)). The resulting scaling factorγhas the
following forms for several common distributions:
γ=



µ1 −µ 0
σ2 ,Gaussian,
logit(µ1)−logit(µ 0),Bernoulli,
logµ 1 −logµ 0,Poisson,
whereµ y = E(X|Y=y) andσ 2 = Var(X|Y=y). In these cases, a one-unit increase in
zcorresponds to an increase inxof size 1/γ, the reciprocal of the separation between the two
classes.
4 Numerical Experiments
Below we evaluate the performance of Smart Bayes versus Naive Bayes and logistic regression on
simulated and empirical data. We begin by showing the performance of Smart Bayes on data gen-
erated from the Gaussian and t-distributions. We then present the performance of these classifiers
on seven empirical datasets.
All logistic regressions plotted below were fit using the standardglmfunction in R. The naive
Bayes classifiers were built using thenaive bayesfunction from thenaivebayespackage in R [11].
To estimate the marginal log density ratios, we used thegamfunction withfamily = "binomial"
from themgcvpackage [24] in R. The code used to generate the results in this paper is available
online at GitHub.
10
4.1 Multivariate Gaussian and t-distribution simulations
In this simulation, we consider four data-generating distributions: a multivariatetwith degrees of
freedomd f= 5,d f= 10, andd f= 30, as well as a multivariate Gaussian distribution. For each
training sizem, we generatemobservations from Class 0 andmobservations from Class 1. We
then randomly sample half of all the observations and assign them to the training set and assign
the remainder to the test set. The means and covariances for the classes in this simulation are
the sample means and covariances from the two classes of the ionosphere dataset in Section 4.2.
Figure 1 reports the average misclassification rate over 100 replications for Naive Bayes, Smart
Bayes, and logistic regression.
In each of these simulations, Smart Bayes has the lowest misclassification rate as the training
size grows large. Smart Bayes always outperforms logistic regression and outperforms Naive Bayes
at large sample sizes; however, when the data generating distributions have heavier tails (fewer
degrees of freedom), Smart Bayes overtakes Naive Bayes even at smaller sample sizes. Naive Bayes
appears to have a lower asymptotic error rate than logistic regression as the degrees of freedom
increase.
11
Gaussian
Multivariate t, df = 30
Multivariate t, df = 10
Multivariate t, df = 5
120 180 240 300 360 420 480 540 600 660 720 780 840 900 960
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Training size
Misclassification rate
Legend Logistic Regression Naive Bayes Smart Bayes
Misclassification rate vs. Training size for Gaussian and t simulations
Figure 1: Average misclassification rate over 100 replications at different training sizes for the
multivariatetwith 5, 10, and 30 degrees of freedom and the Gaussian. Error rates were computed
at every 30 observations. These simulations usedp= 32 covariates, where the mean vectorµand
the covariancesΣused in the data generation were the sample means and covariances for the two
classes in the ionosphere dataset.
4.2 Real data experiments
We evaluate the performance of the proposed Smart Bayes classifier versus Naive Bayes and logistic
regression on seven real datasets from the UCI Machine Learning Repository [3]. All datasets
12
except for the abalone dataset were used in Ng and Jordan [12]. We reproduce their comparisons
while adding the Smart Bayes classifier using the spline-based density-ratio estimation method.
As done by Ng and Jordan [12], we evaluate the performance of these classifiers at different
training sizes. At each training sizem, we randomly selectmobservations as training samples and
assign the rest of the observations in the dataset to the test sample. We conduct 200 replications
at each training size and report the average misclassification rate on out-of-sample data. These
are plotted in the figures below. The general shapes of the plots below match those of the same
figures in [12], but there are minor differences. Although we attempted to choose the same variables
as Ng and Jordan, we may have omitted or included variables that they did not omit or include,
since their description only states that non-continuous variables were excluded from the analysis.
It is also likely that their implementations of logistic regression and Naive Bayes differ from those
used here. Experiments were conducted on an AWS EC2 instance of sizet2.xlargeusing the
clustermqpackage [14] in version 4.3.2 of R [13].
In the experiments, there are several instances where the Smart Bayes classifier outperforms both
Naive Bayes and logistic regression. In particular, the adult dataset in Figure 3, the ionosphere
dataset in Figure 5, and the sonar dataset in Figure 8 all demonstrate that the Smart Bayes classifier
can yield lower misclassification rates than the other methods. These differences generally arise at
larger training sizes, mimicking logistic regression’s relationship with Naive Bayes as described
by [12]. The Smart Bayes classifier also relies on an ability to estimate density ratios, which the
Naive Bayes classifier requires and logistic regression does not. These two properties reinforce Smart
Bayes’s need for sufficient training observations.
13
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
0.15 0.20 0.25
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: abalone
LR
NB
SB
Figure 2: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the
abalone dataset. Observations corresponding to the middle two quartiles of the response variable
were removed from the dataset, so classification took place on data that were above the 3rd quartile
(Class 1) or below the 1st quartile (Class 0).
14
200 400 600 800 1000
0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.27 0.28 0.29
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: adult
LR
NB
SB
Figure 3: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the adult
dataset. Non-continuous variables were removed from the classification.
15
100 200 300 400 500
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: boston
LR
NB
SB
Figure 4: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the
Boston housing dataset. The response variable was whether the median value of the home exceeded
the median value of all homes. Non-continuous variables were removed from the classification. This
dataset is namedBostonand is available via the MASS library [21].
16
50 100 150 200 250 300
0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: ionosphere
LR
NB
SB
Figure 5: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the
ionosphere dataset. Non-continuous variables were removed from the classification.
17
100 200 300 400 500
0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: liver
LR
NB
SB
Figure 6: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the liver
dataset. Non-continuous variables were removed from the classification.
18
100 200 300 400 500 600 700
0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.32
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: pima
LR
NB
SB
Figure 7: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the Pima
dataset. Non-continuous variables were removed from the classification.
19
80 100 120 140 160 180 200
0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35
Size of training data
Misclassification rate
Misclassification rates: sonar
LR
NB
SB
Figure 8: Average misclassification rate over 200 replications at different training sizes for the Sonar
dataset. Non-continuous variables were removed from the classification.
5 Discussion
We proposed a hybrid classifier, Smart Bayes, that uses density ratios as features within a logistic
regression framework. Smart Bayes generalizes Naive Bayes by allowing flexible weighting of density
ratios. To build the classifier, we developed a spline-based method for estimating log density ratios
in Section 3.2.
We compared the performance of the Smart Bayes classifier to both Naive Bayes and logistic
regression in simulation experiments in Section 4.1 and in real data experiments in Section 4.2. The
20
simulations show cases where Smart Bayes outperforms logistic regression and Naive Bayes as the
training size increases. The simulations also demonstrate that there are cases where Naive Bayes
appears to have a lower asymptotic error rate than logistic regression, as discussed in [25].
The empirical experiments, which use some of the same datasets and are presented in the style
of [12], also show that Smart Bayes can outperform its competitor methods. We do not present a
theoretical explanation for when Smart Bayes outperforms the other two methods. As noted in [25],
there is no general criterion for deciding whether to use a discriminative or generative classifier.
However, this work demonstrates that there may benefits to blending the two approaches.
There are several promising directions for future research. Smart Bayes may be enhanced by
incorporating additional terms, such as higher-order interactions between generative features, and
by using regularization methods to select among them. While this work focused on features de-
rived from likelihood ratios of univariate marginal densities, extending the approach to multivariate
marginal densities, guided by prior knowledge or graphical structure, may yield further improve-
ments and produce classifiers closer to the optimal Bayes rule. Theoretical work that delineates
when and why Smart Bayes outperforms Naive Bayes and logistic regression would also be worth-
while.
Another direction is to integrate these generative features into other machine learning models,
such as support vector machines, transformers, and other deep learning architectures to assess
whether they offer similar gains in classification performance. Propensity score matching is also an
area where Smart Bayes could be useful, since its potential to approach the optimal Bayes classifier
may yield better propensity scores than logistic regression.
References
[1] Peter J Bickel, Elizaveta Levina, et al. Some theory for Fisher’s linear discriminant function,
naive Bayes’, and some alternatives when there are many more variables than observations.
Bernoulli, 10(6):989–1010, 2004.
[2] Pedro Domingos and Michael Pazzani. On the optimality of the simple Bayesian classifier
under zero-one loss.Machine learning, 29(2-3):103–130, 1997.
21
[3] Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017.
[4] Emily Fox. Bayes optimal classifier and naive Bayes, 2017. Course notes from University of
Washington.
[5] Jerome Friedman, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, et al. Additive logistic regression: a sta-
tistical view of boosting (with discussion and a rejoinder by the authors).Annals of Statistics,
28(2):337–407, 2000.
[6] Geof H Givens and Jennifer A Hoeting.Computational statistics, volume 703. John Wiley &
Sons, 2012.
[7] Shohei Hido, Yuta Tsuboi, Hisashi Kashima, Masashi Sugiyama, and Takafumi Kanamori.
Statistical outlier detection using direct density ratio estimation.Knowledge and information
systems, 26(2):309–336, 2011.
[8] Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani.An introduction to
statistical learning, volume 112. Springer, 2013.
[9] Takafumi Kanamori, Shohei Hido, and Masashi Sugiyama. A least-squares approach to direct
importance estimation.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 10(Jul):1391–1445, 2009.
[10] Song Liu, Makoto Yamada, Nigel Collier, and Masashi Sugiyama. Change-point detection in
time-series data by relative density-ratio estimation.Neural Networks, 43:72–83, 2013.
[11] Michal Majka.naivebayes: High Performance Implementation of the Naive Bayes Algorithm
in R, 2019. R package version 0.9.6.
[12] Andrew Y Ng and Michael I Jordan. On discriminative vs. generative classifiers: A comparison
of logistic regression and naive Bayes. InAdvances in neural information processing systems,
pages 841–848, 2002.
[13] R Core Team.R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2023.
22
[14] Michael Schubert. clustermq enables efficient parallelisation of genomic analyses.Bioinfor-
matics, May 2019.
[15] Cosma Rohilla Shalizi. Estimating distributions and densities, 2016. Course notes from
Carnegie Mellon University.
[16] Bernard W Silverman. Density ratios, empirical likelihood and cot death.Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 27(1):26–33, 1978.
[17] Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori.Density ratio estimation in machine
learning. Cambridge University Press, 2012.
[18] Masashi Sugiyama, Makoto Yamada, Paul Von Buenau, Taiji Suzuki, Takafumi Kanamori,
and Motoaki Kawanabe. Direct density-ratio estimation with dimensionality reduction via
least-squares hetero-distributional subspace search.Neural Networks, 24(2):183–198, 2011.
[19] Zachary Terner.Classification methods for multivariate and functional data using features from
density ratio estimation. PhD thesis, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2020.
[20] Masatoshi Uehara, Issei Sato, Masahiro Suzuki, Kotaro Nakayama, and Yutaka Matsuo.
Generative adversarial nets from a density ratio estimation perspective.arXiv preprint
arXiv:1610.02920, 2016.
[21] W. N. Venables and B. D. Ripley.Modern Applied Statistics with S. Springer, New York,
fourth edition, 2002. ISBN 0-387-95457-0.
[22] Grace Wahba, Yuedong Wang, Chong Gu, Ronald Klein, Barbara Klein, et al. Smoothing
spline ANOVA for exponential families, with application to the Wisconsin Epidemiological
Study of Diabetic Retinopathy: the 1994 Neyman Memorial Lecture.The Annals of Statistics,
23(6):1865–1895, 1995.
[23] Yuedong Wang.Smoothing splines: methods and applications. CRC Press, 2011.
[24] S.N Wood.Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R. Chapman and Hall/CRC,
2 edition, 2017.
23
[25] Jing-Hao Xue and D Michael Titterington. Comment on “on discriminative vs. generative
classifiers: A comparison of logistic regression and naive bayes”.Neural processing letters,
28(3):169–187, 2008.
[26] Tzay Y Young and Thomas W Calvert.Classification, estimation, and pattern recognition.
Elsevier, 1974.
24