Journal of Machine Learning Research 26 (2025) 1-8 Submitted 8/24; Revised 11/25; Published 11/25
DeepCAVE: A Visualization and Analysis Tool for
Automated Machine Learning
Sarah Segel1 s.segel@ai.uni-hannover.de
Helena Graf1 h.graf@ai.uni-hannover.de
Edward Bergman2 bergmane@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Kristina Thieme1 kristina.thieme@stud.uni-hannover.de
Marcel Wever1,4 m.wever@ai.uni-hannover.de
Alexander Tornede1 a.tornede@ai.uni-hannover.de
Frank Hutter2,3 fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Marius Lindauer1,4 m.lindauer@ai.uni-hannover.de
1Leibniz University Hannover, 2University of Freiburg, 3ELLIS Institute T¨ ubingen,4L3S Research
Center
Editor:Zeyi Wen
Abstract
Hyperparameter optimization (HPO), as a central paradigm of AutoML, is crucial for lever-
aging the full potential of machine learning (ML) models; yet its complexity poses challenges
in understanding and debugging the optimization process. We present DeepCAVE, a tool
for interactive visualization and analysis, providing insights into HPO. Through an interac-
tive dashboard, researchers, data scientists, and ML engineers can explore various aspects
of the HPO process and identify issues, untouched potentials, and new insights about the
ML model being tuned. By empowering users with actionable insights, DeepCAVE con-
tributes to the interpretability of HPO and ML on a design level and aims to foster the
development of more robust and efficient methodologies in the future.
Keywords:Automated machine learning, hyperparameter optimization, interpretable
machine learning, human-centered machine learning, visualization
1 Introduction
Modern methods for hyperparameter optimization (HPO) encompass a diverse range of ap-
proaches beyond grid and random search (Turner et al., 2021; Bischl et al., 2023). However,
their lack of insight and transparency can lead to a lack of trust by users (Drozdal et al.,
2020) and make debugging such methods and their application difficult. We introduce Deep-
CAVE, a visualization and analysis tool for HPO, aiding in understanding and debugging the
application of HPO. At present, HPO is our main priority, wherein metadata in the format
of configurations and performance values is generated in an iterative process, as many auto-
mated machine learning (AutoML) packages do, such as Auto-Sklearn (Feurer et al., 2022),
TPOT (Olson and Moore, 2019), AutoPyTorch (Zimmer et al., 2021) or Auto-Keras (Jin
et al., 2019). Similarly, leveraging DeepCAVE for neural architecture search (NAS) (Elsken
©2025 Sarah Segel, Helena Graf, Edward Bergman, Kristina Thieme, Marcel Wever, Alexander Tornede, Frank
Hutter, Marius Lindauer.
License: CC-BY 4.0, seehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v26/24-1353.html.
arXiv:2512.01810v1  [cs.LG]  1 Dec 2025
Segel, Graf, Bergman, Thieme, Wever, Tornede, Hutter, and Lindauer
DeepCAVE
Redis Queue
Queueing and asynchronous
execution of computationally
expensive plugins
Dash
Interactive web application
allowing users to easily
control what to analyze
Plugins
 Provide various options to
analyze and visualize the
HPO meta data
Converters
Allow loading HPO meta datafrom different optimizers
Summary
OverviewConﬁgurations
Conﬁguration Footprint
      Hyperparameter Analysis         
 Importances            Parallel Coordinates Ablation Paths        Partial Dependencies
     Conﬁguration Cube   Symbolic Explanations
Objective Analysis
Cost Over TimePareto Front
Budget Analysis
Budget Correlation
SMAC3
AMLTK
Optuna
Custom Tabular Formats
Ray Tune
Figure 1: Overview of DeepCAVE’s components and their functionalities.
et al., 2022) or combined algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization (Thornton
et al., 2013) is possible by encoding architectural decisions, algorithmic choices, or machine
learning pipelines as part of the configuration. Advances in machine learning and HPO,
including multi-objective or multi-fidelity methods, challenge interpretation and analysis
tools. DeepCAVE addresses this by offering support for multiple objectives and fidelities,
with specific visualizations tailored to the different scenarios. This tightly interacts with the
vision of a more human-centered approach of AutoML (Lindauer et al., 2024), in which users
can learn from HPO and ultimately even integrate their expertise into the system (Hvarfner
et al., 2022; Mallik et al., 2023). Moreover, to facilitate a reproducible and transparent re-
search process, users can export visualizations to incorporate into their research papers,
thereby providing insight into their HPO process and optimized hyperparameters.
2 Features and Usage
DeepCAVE’s architecture relies upon various components, as illustrated in Figure 1. The
tool is exclusively written in Python, given its prevalence as the predominant programming
language in machine learning (Raschka et al., 2020). Built on the Dash framework (Plotly
Technologies Inc., 2015), it offers users a fully interactive environment within a web browser.
2.1 Converters
DeepCAVE utilizes run objects as a basic unit for data interpretation, where a run can be
considered an HPO process consisting of a list of trials, each representing a hyperparameter
configuration with associated objective value, budget, and seed. The interface allows for
selection and grouping of runs, streamlining the analysis of many HPO runs at once. Con-
verters are used to access the optimizer data stored in the file system and transfer them into
a run object. They keep track of both finished and running optimization processes that con-
sistently write new results to disk. At the time of writing, DeepCAVE supports loading runs
created by the HPO packages SMAC3 (Lindauer et al., 2022), Ray Tune (Liaw et al., 2018),
and Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019), as well as, the AutoML framework AMLTK (Bergman
et al., 2024). Furthermore, to allow loading runs from arbitrary optimizers, DeepCAVE
offers a generic tabular input format, as well as a programmatic interface.
2
DeepCAVE: A Visualization and Analysis Tool for Automated Machine Learning
(a) Configuration Footprint.
 (b) Pareto Front.
 (c) Importances.
Figure 2: Examples of plots produced via DeepCAVE’s plugins. A mouseover allows ob-
taining additional information, and clicking on single configurations in the plot
opens the Configurations plugin, providing details regarding that configuration.
2.2 Analysis Plugins
DeepCAVE’s strength lies in its modular plugin structure, providing diverse insights into the
HPO run. Plugins allow analyzing overall runs, objectives, hyperparameters, and budgets
through texts, tables, and Plotly (Plotly Technologies Inc., 2015) visualizations. Dynamic
filtering enables the interactive selection of certain aspects, such as specific objectives or
budgets. For computationally intensive plugins, Redis Queue (Redis Inc., 2024) is leveraged
for efficient queueing and asynchronous execution, ensuring a responsive user experience.
Overall Optimization AnalysisTheOverview pluginoffers a holistic view, showing
optimizer choice, configuration space, and trial status. Detailed analysis of individual con-
figurations can be performed via theConfigurations plugin. Employing multi-dimensional
scaling (Kruskal, 1964a,b) for dimensionality reduction, theConfiguration Footprint plugin
visually represents the optimizer’s coverage of the configuration space (Biedenkapp et al.,
2018), as shown in Figure 2a. This can help to identify limited exploration, suggesting the
optimizer might be stuck in a local optimum.
Objective AnalysisTheCost Over Time pluginvisualizes optimization convergence,
either over time or the number of trials evaluated, allowing to compare different optimization
strategies such as the optimizer chosen, search space design, or other meta-level decisions.
ThePareto Front pluginvisually represents configurations that achieve different tradeoffs
between conflicting objectives, such as runtime versus final loss, as shown in Figure 2b.
Hyperparameter AnalysisAs the relationship between hyperparameter configura-
tions and objective values constitutes a crucial aspect of HPO, DeepCAVE provides a variety
of plugins in this regard.Parallel Coordinatesplots visualize hyperparameter configurations
as lines, connecting their hyperparameter values and corresponding final scores (Golovin
et al., 2017). Additionally,Partial Dependenceplots (Friedman, 2001; Moosbauer et al.,
2021) offer insights into the average marginal effect of single hyperparameters on the objec-
tive value. Moreover,Symbolic Explanations(Segel et al., 2023) provide explicit formulas
capturing the relationship between hyperparameter and objective values. To understand
the impact of individual hyperparameters on the objective, theImportances plugincan be
used. With fANOVA (Hutter et al., 2014), see Figure 2c, and local (hyper)parameter impor-
tance (LPI) (Biedenkapp et al., 2018), users can explore both global and local importance.
3
Segel, Graf, Bergman, Thieme, Wever, Tornede, Hutter, and Lindauer
Ablation Paths(Biedenkapp et al., 2017) provide insights into the impact of sequentially ad-
justing individual hyperparameter values towards the incumbent configuration. In practice,
DeepCAVE has been used to analyze optimization runs with up to 39 hyperparameters,
confirming its scalability for high-dimensional settings.
Budget AnalysisEffective use of multiple fidelities crucially relies on a consistent rank
or performance correlation to effectively allocate more resources to better configurations.
TheBudget Correlation plugindirectly visualizes this correlation between fidelities, allowing
users to assess the utility of their multiple fidelities.
Although DeepCAVE provides diverse analysis plugins and visualizations, their cus-
tomization and composition are currently limited, outlining interesting future work.
3 Existing Tools for Explainable AutoML
With the rising interest in explainability and insight into optimization processes, a num-
ber of tools aiming to fill this gap have emerged. Among these, XAutoML (Z¨ oller et al.,
2023) focuses on AutoML and interpretability. Similar to DeepCAVE, it provides a num-
ber of different interactive visualizations. Notably, it allows users to extend its capabilities
through custom “cards”, similar to plugins in DeepCAVE, and supports a range of common
(Auto)ML libraries. In contrast to our tool, it lacks support for (parallel) background com-
putation and analysis of running HPO processes. Further, only one HPO run is considered
at a time, making comparisons between runs cumbersome. Beyond XAutoML, platforms
like RapidMiner (Altair Engineering Inc., 2024), Google Vizier (Golovin et al., 2017), and
ATMseer (Wang et al., 2018) cater to specific facets of AutoML processes, such as algo-
rithm selection, experiment tracking, and pipeline analysis, albeit often with limitations in
terms of interpretability at the HPO level or support for run comparisons. Similarly, tools
like Optuna (Akiba et al., 2019), IOHanalyzer (Wang et al., 2022), TensorBoard (Abadi
et al., 2015), WandB (Biewald, 2020), MLFlow (Chen et al., 2020), MLJar (P lo´ nska and
P lo´ nski, 2021), SigOpt (Clark and Hayes, 2019), IBM AutoAI (Wang et al., 2020), Pipeline
Profiler (Ono et al., 2021), iraceplot (L´ opez-Ib´ a˜ nez et al., 2025), and Boxer (Gleicher et al.,
2020) contribute valuable insights through various forms of run analysis, visualization, and
reporting. However, many of these tools depend on specific formats, lack extensibility, or
fail to support comparisons across multiple HPO runs. DeepCAVE distinguishes itself in
this field with its focus on HPO, interpretability, and interactivity. Its unique proposition
lies in its ability to facilitate detailed comparisons across different HPO runs. Moreover, its
extensive format compatibility, efficient computational parallelization, and browser-based
accessibility mitigate major usability challenges found in comparable tools.
4 Conclusion
DeepCAVE is a novel tool for interactively analyzing and explaining HPO runs. It allows
performing comprehensive analyses of HPO runs concerning their hyperparameters, objec-
tives, and budgets via an interactive dashboard running in the web browser. DeepCAVE is
accessible under Apache License Version 2.0 1 and can be installed via the instructions in
the GitHub repositoryhttps://github.com/automl/DeepCAVE.
1.https://www.apache.org/licenses
4
DeepCAVE: A Visualization and Analysis Tool for Automated Machine Learning
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
Sarah Segel acknowledges financial support by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs
and Energy of Germany in the project CoyPu under Grant No. 01MK21007L. Helena Graf,
Alexander Tornede, Marcel Wever, and Marius Lindauer gratefully acknowledge funding
by the European Union (ERC, “ixAutoML”, grant no.101041029). Frank Hutter acknowl-
edges funding by the European Union (ERC Consolidator Grant DeepLearning 2.0, grant
no. 101045765). Edward Bergman was partially supported by TAILOR, a project funded
by EU Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under GA No 95221. Views and
opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect
those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither
the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.
References
M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. Corrado, A. Davis,
J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia,
R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Man´ e, R. Monga, S. Moore,
D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar,
P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke, V. Vasudevan, F. Vi´ egas, O. Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wat-
tenberg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous systems, 2015. URLhttps://www.tensorflow.org.
T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama. Optuna: A next-generation
hyperparameter optimization framework. InProc. of KDD’19, 2019.
Altair Engineering Inc. Altair Rapidminer data analytics and AI platform, 2024. URL
https://altair.com/altair-rapidminer.
E. Bergman, M. Feurer, A. Bahram, A. R. Balef, L. Purucker, S. Segel, M. Lindauer,
F. Hutter, and K. Eggensperger. AMLTK: A modular AutoML toolkit in Python.Journal
of Open Source Software, 9(100):6367, 2024.
A. Biedenkapp, M. Lindauer, K. Eggensperger, C. Fawcett, H. Hoos, and F. Hutter. Ef-
ficient parameter importance analysis via ablation with surrogates. In S. Singh and
S. Markovitch, editors,Proceedings of the Thirty-First Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence (AAAI’17), pages 773–779. AAAI Press, 2017.
A. Biedenkapp, J. Marben, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter. CAVE: Configuration assessment,
visualization and evaluation. In R. Battiti, M. Brunato, I. Kotsireas, and P. Pardalos,
editors,Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning and Intelligent Opti-
mization (LION), Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2018.
5
Segel, Graf, Bergman, Thieme, Wever, Tornede, Hutter, and Lindauer
L. Biewald. Experiment tracking with Weights and Biases, 2020. URLhttps://www.
wandb.com/.
B. Bischl, M. Binder, M. Lang, T. Pielok, J. Richter, S. Coors, J. Thomas, T. Ullmann,
M. Becker, A.-L. Boulesteix, D. Deng, and M. Lindauer. Hyperparameter optimization:
Foundations, algorithms, best practices, and open challenges.Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, page e1484, 2023.
A. Chen, A. Chow, A. Davidson, A. DCunha, A. Ghodsi, S. Hong, A. Konwinski, C. Mewald,
S. Murching, T. Nykodym, P. Ogilvie, M. Parkhe, A. Singh, F. Xie, M. Zaharia, R. Zang,
J. Zheng, and C. Zumar. Developments in MLflow: A system to accelerate the machine
learning lifecycle. InProc. of International Workshop on Data Management for End-to-
End Machine Learning, 2020.
S. Clark and P. Hayes. Sigopt web page, 2019. URLhttps://sigopt.org.
J. Drozdal, J. Weisz, D. Wang, G. Dass, B. Yao, C. Zhao, M. J. Muller, L. Ju, and H. Su.
Trust in AutoML: Exploring information needs for establishing trust in automated ma-
chine learning systems. In F. Patern` o, N. Oliver, C. Conati, L. D. Spano, and N. Tintarev,
editors,Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
(IUI’20), pages 297–307. ACM, 2020.
T. Elsken, A. Zela, J. Metzen, B. Staffler, T. Brox, A. Valada, and F. Hutter. Neural archi-
tecture search for dense prediction tasks in computer vision.arXiv:2202.07242 [cs.CV],
2022.
M. Feurer, K. Eggensperger, S. Falkner, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter. Auto-Sklearn 2.0:
Hands-free automl via meta-learning.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(261):
1–61, 2022.
J. Friedman. Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine.Annals of
Statistics, pages 1189–1232, 2001.
M. Gleicher, A. Barve, X. Yu, and F. Heimerl. Boxer: Interactive comparison of classifier
results.Computer Graphics Forum, 39(3), 2020.
D. Golovin, B. Solnik, S. Moitra, G. Kochanski, J. Karro, and D. Sculley. Google Vizier:
A service for black-box optimization. In S. Matwin, S. Yu, and F. Farooq, editors,
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
and Data Mining (KDD’17), pages 1487–1495. ACM Press, 2017.
F. Hutter, H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. An efficient approach for assessing hyperparam-
eter importance. In E. Xing and T. Jebara, editors,Proceedings of the 31th International
Conference on Machine Learning, (ICML’14), pages 754–762. Omnipress, 2014.
C. Hvarfner, D. Stoll, A. Souza, L. Nardi, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter.πBO: Augmenting
acquisition functions with user beliefs for bayesian optimization. InProc. of ICLR’22,
2022.
6
DeepCAVE: A Visualization and Analysis Tool for Automated Machine Learning
H. Jin, Q. Song, and X. Hu. Auto-Keras: An efficient neural architecture search system. In
A. Teredesai, V. Kumar, Y. Li, R. Rosales, E. Terzi, and G. Karypis, editors,Proceedings
of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining (KDD’19), pages 1946–1956. ACM Press, 2019.
J. Kruskal. Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypoth-
esis.Psychometrika, 29:1–27, 1964a.
J. Kruskal. Nonmetric multidimensional scaling: A numerical method.Psychometrika, 29:
115–129, 1964b.
R. Liaw, E. Liang, R. Nishihara, P. Moritz, J. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica. Tune: A research
platform for distributed model selection and training. In R. Garnett, F. Hutter, J. Van-
schoren, P. Brazdil, R. Caruana, C. Giraud-Carrier, I. Guyon, and B. K´ egl, editors,ICML
workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2018), 2018.
M. Lindauer, K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, A. Biedenkapp, D. Deng, C. Benjamins,
T. Ruhkopf, R. Sass, and F. Hutter. SMAC3: A versatile bayesian optimization package
for Hyperparameter Optimization.Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(54):1–9,
2022.
M. Lindauer, F. Karl, A. Klier, J. Moosbauer, A. Tornede, A. Mueller, F. Hutter, M. Feurer,
and B. Bischl. Position: A call to action for a human-centered AutoML paradigm. In
Proc. of ICML’24, 2024.
M. L´ opez-Ib´ a˜ nez, P. O˜ nate Mar´ ın, and L. P´ erez C´ aceres.iraceplot: Plots for Visualizing
the Data Produced by the ’irace’ Package, 2025. URLhttps://auto-optimization.
github.io/iraceplot/.
N. Mallik, C. Hvarfner, E. Bergman, D. Stoll, M. Janowski, M. Lindauer, L. Nardi, and
F. Hutter. PriorBand: Practical hyperparameter optimization in the age of deep learning.
InProceedings of the 37th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS’23). Curran Associates, 2023.
J. Moosbauer, J. Herbinger, G. Casalicchio, M. Lindauer, and B. Bischl. Explaining hy-
perparameter optimization via partial dependence plots. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelz-
imer, K. Nguyen, P. Liang, J. Vaughan, and Y. Dauphin, editors,Proceedings of the
35th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS’21), pages 2280–2291. Curran Associates, 2021.
R. Olson and J. Moore. TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization tool for automating
machine learning. In F. Hutter, L. Kotthoff, and J. Vanschoren, editors,Automated Ma-
chine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges, pages 151–160. Springer, 2019. Available
for free athttp://automl.org/book.
J. Ono, S. Castelo, R. Lopez, E. Bertini, J. Freire, and C. Silva. PipelineProfiler: A
visual analytics tool for the exploration of AutoML pipelines.IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 27(2):390–400, 2021.
7
Segel, Graf, Bergman, Thieme, Wever, Tornede, Hutter, and Lindauer
A. P lo´ nska and P. P lo´ nski. MLJAR: State-of-the-art automated machine learning framework
for tabular data. version 0.10.3, 2021. URLhttps://mljar.com.
Plotly Technologies Inc. Collaborative data science, 2015. URLhttps://plot.ly.
S. Raschka, J. Patterson, and C. Nolet. Machine learning in Python: Main developments
and technology trends in data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence.In-
formation, 11(4), 2020.
Redis Inc. Redis Queue, 2024. URLhttps://github.com/rq/rq.
S. Segel, H. Graf, A. Tornede, B. Bischl, and M. Lindauer. Symbolic explanations for hy-
perparameter optimization. In A. Faust, C. White, F. Hutter, R. Garnett, and J. Gard-
ner, editors,Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Automated Machine
Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2023.
C. Thornton, F. Hutter, H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. Auto-WEKA: combined selection
and Hyperparameter Optimization of classification algorithms. In I. Dhillon, Y. Koren,
R. Ghani, T. Senator, P. Bradley, R. Parekh, J. He, R. Grossman, and R. Uthurusamy,
editors,The 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD’13), pages 847–855. ACM Press, 2013.
R. Turner, D. Eriksson, M. McCourt, J. Kiili, E. Laaksonen, Z. Xu, and I. Guyon. Bayesian
optimization is superior to random search for machine learning hyperparameter tuning:
Analysis of the Black-Box Optimization Challenge 2020. In H. Escalante and K. Hofmann,
editors,Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track Competition and
Demonstration, pages 3–26. Curran Associates, 2021.
D. Wang, P. Ram, D. Weidele, S. Liu, M. Muller, J. Weisz, A. Valente, A. Chaudhary,
D. Torres, H. Samulowitz, and L. Amini. Autoai: Automating the end-to-end ai life-
cycle with humans-in-the-loop. InProceedings of the 25th International Conference on
Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’20), page 77–78, 2020.
H. Wang, D. Vermetten, F. Ye, C. Doerr, and T. B¨ ack. IOHanalyzer: Detailed perfor-
mance analyses for iterative optimization heuristics.ACM Transactions on Evolutionary
Learning and Optimization, 2(1), 2022.
Q. Wang, Y. Ming, Z. Jin, Q. Shen, D. Liu, M. J. Smith, K. Veeramachaneni, and H. Qu.
ATMSeer: Increasing transparency and controllability in automated machine learning.
InProceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
2018.
L. Zimmer, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter. Auto-Pytorch: Multi-fidelity metalearning for
efficient and robust AutoDL.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence, 43:3079–3090, 2021.
M. Z¨ oller, W. Titov, T. Schlegel, and M. F. Huber. XAutoML: A visual analytics tool
for understanding and validating automated machine learning.ACM Transactions on
Interactive Intelligent Systems, 13(4), 2023.
8