hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on
Reconfigurable Hardware
JAN-FREDERIK SCHULTE∗,Purdue University, USA
BENJAMIN RAMHORST∗,ETH Zurich, Switzerland
CHANG SUN∗,California Institute of Technology, USA
JOVAN MITREVSKI,Fermi National Accelerator Lab, USA
NICOLÒ GHIELMETTI, ENRICO LUPI, DIMITRIOS DANOPOULOS, and VLADIMIR LONČAR†,Eu-
ropean Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Switzerland
JAVIER DUARTE,University of California San Diego, USA
DAVID BURNETTE,Catapult HLS - Siemens EDA, USA
LAURI LAATU,Imperial College London, United Kingdom
STYLIANOS TZELEPIS,National Technical University of Athens, Greece
KONSTANTINOS AXIOTIS and QUENTIN BERTHET‡,University of Geneva, Switzerland
HAOYAN WANG, PAUL WHITE, and SULEYMAN DEMIRSOY,Altera Corporation, USA
MARCO COLOMBO,Discovery Partners Institute, USA
THEA KLAEBOE AARRESTAD,ETH Zurich, Switzerland
SIONI SUMMERS and MAURIZIO PIERINI,European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Switzerland
GIUSEPPE DI GUGLIELMO, JENNIFER NGADIUBA, JAVIER CAMPOS, BEN HAWKS, ABHIJITH
GANDRAKOTA, FARAH FAHIM, and NHAN TRAN,Fermi National Accelerator Lab, USA
GEORGE A. CONSTANTINIDES, ZHIQIANG QUE, WAYNE LUK, and ALEXANDER TAPPER,Impe-
rial College London, United Kingdom
DUC HOANG, NOAH PALADINO, and PHILIP HARRIS,Massachusetts Institute of Technology , USA
BO-CHENG LAI,National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
MANUEL VALENTIN, RYAN FORELLI, and SEDA OGRENCI,Northwestern University, USA
LINO GERLACH,Princeton University, USA
RIAN BROOKS FLYNN and MIA LIU,Purdue University, USA
DANIEL DIAZ, ELHAM E KHODA, MELISSA QUINNAN, and RUSSELL MARROQUIN SO-
LARES,University of California San Diego, USA
SANTOSH PARAJULI and MARK S. NEUBAUER,University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA
CHRISTIAN HERWIG,University of Michigan, USA
Manuscript submitted to ACM 1
arXiv:2512.01463v1  [cs.AR]  1 Dec 2025
HO FUNG TSOI and DYLAN RANKIN,University of Pennsylvania, USA
SHIH-CHIEH HSU and SCOTT HAUCK,University of Washington, USA
We presenthls4ml, a free and open-source platform that translates machine learning (ML) models from modern deep learning
frameworks into high-level synthesis (HLS) code that can be integrated into full designs for field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs)
or application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs). With its flexible and modular design,hls4mlsupports a large number of deep
learning frameworks and can target HLS compilers from several vendors, including Vitis HLS, Intel oneAPI and Catapult HLS. Together
with a wider eco-system for software-hardware co-design,hls4mlhas enabled the acceleration of ML inference in a wide range
of commercial and scientific applications where low latency, resource usage, and power consumption are critical. In this paper, we
describe the structure and functionality of thehls4mlplatform. The overarching design considerations for the generated HLS code
are discussed, together with selected performance results.
CCS Concepts:•Hardware →Hardware accelerators;Reconfigurable logic applications;•Computing methodologies →
Machine learning.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: FPGA, Hardware Acceleration, Machine Learning Acceleration, High-Level Synthesis
1 Introduction
Recent advances in machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) have driven the widespread adoption and
deployment of neural networks. For example, cloud vendors are increasingly deploying large language models (LLMs)
and deep learning recommendation models as part of their services [ 52, 102]. Similarly, there is an ever-increasing
demand for specialized, highly efficient deep learning models for latency- and power-constrained environments, such
as real-time systems or edge devices [35]. Some examples include high-energy physics (HEP) systems at CERN [28, 29],
robotics [100, 107], network infrastructure [ 12], industrial manufacturing facilities [ 101], and satellites and other
spacecraft [74, 108]. To tackle the computational and memory requirements of modern neural networks, focus has
∗Equal contribution.
†Also at Institute of Physics Belgrade.
‡Currently at HEPIA, HES-SO University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland.
Authors’ Contact Information: Jan-Frederik Schulte, jschulte@cern.ch, Purdue University, USA; Benjamin Ramhorst, bramhorst@ethz.ch, ETH Zurich,
Switzerland; Chang Sun, chsun@cern.ch, California Institute of Technology, USA; Jovan Mitrevski, jmitrevs@fnal.gov, Fermi National Accelerator Lab,
USA; Nicolò Ghielmetti, nicolo.ghielmetti@cern.ch; Enrico Lupi, enrico.lupi@cern.ch; Dimitrios Danopoulos, dimitrios.danopoulos@cern.ch; Vladimir
Lončar, vloncar@cern.ch, European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Switzerland; Javier Duarte, jduarte@ucsd.edu, University of California
San Diego, USA; David Burnette, david.burnette@siemens.com, Catapult HLS - Siemens EDA, USA; Lauri Laatu, l.laatu@imperial.ac.uk, Imperial
College London, United Kingdom; Stylianos Tzelepis, stylianos.tzelepis@cern.ch, National Technical University of Athens, Greece; Konstantinos Axiotis,
kaxiotis1.0@gmail.com; Quentin Berthet, quentin.berthet@hesge.ch, University of Geneva, Switzerland; Haoyan Wang, harry.wang@altera.com; Paul
White, paul.white@altera.com; Suleyman Demirsoy, suleyman.demirsoy@altera.com, Altera Corporation, USA; Marco Colombo, mcolom4@uillinois.edu,
Discovery Partners Institute, USA; Thea Klaeboe Aarrestad, thea.aarrestad@cern.ch, ETH Zurich, Switzerland; Sioni Summers, sioni@cern.ch; Maurizio
Pierini, maurizio.pierini@cern.ch, European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Switzerland; Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, gdg@fnal.gov; Jennifer
Ngadiuba, ngadiuba@fnal.gov; Javier Campos, jcampos@fnal.gov; Ben Hawks, bhawks@fnal.gov; Abhijith Gandrakota, abhijith@fnal.gov; Farah Fahim,
farah@fnal.gov; Nhan Tran, ntran@fnal.gov, Fermi National Accelerator Lab, USA; George A. Constantinides, g.constantinides@imperial.ac.uk; Zhiqiang
Que, z.que@imperial.ac.uk; Wayne Luk, w.luk@imperial.ac.uk; Alexander Tapper, a.tapper@imperial.ac.uk, Imperial College London, United Kingdom;
Duc Hoang, dhoang@mit.edu; Noah Paladino, npaladin@mit.edu; Philip Harris, pcharris@mit.edu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology , USA; Bo-Cheng
Lai, bclai@nycu.edu.tw, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan; Manuel Valentin, manuel.valentin@u.northwestern.edu; Ryan Forelli,
rforelli@u.northwestern.edu; Seda Ogrenci, seda@northwestern.edu, Northwestern University, USA; Lino Gerlach, lino.oscar.gerlach@cern.ch, Princeton
University, USA; Rian Brooks Flynn, rbflynn@purdue.edu; Mia Liu, liu3173@purdue.edu, Purdue University, USA; Daniel Diaz, d4diaz@ucsd.edu; Elham
E Khoda, ekhoda@ucsd.edu; Melissa Quinnan, mquinnan@ucsd.edu; Russell Marroquin Solares, rmarroquinsolares@ucsd.edu, University of California
San Diego, USA; Santosh Parajuli, santoshp@illinois.edu; Mark S. Neubauer, msn@illinois.edu, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA; Christian
Herwig, herwig@umich.edu, University of Michigan, USA; Ho Fung Tsoi, hftsoi@sas.upenn.edu; Dylan Rankin, dsrankin@sas.upenn.edu, University of
Pennsylvania, USA; Shih-Chieh Hsu, schsu@uw.edu; Scott Hauck, hauck@uw.edu, University of Washington, USA.
2 Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 3
shifted from conventional CPUs to specialized hardware, such as GPUs, TPUs, and FPGAs [117]. Complementary to
specialized hardware, model compression techniques [22, 49] and novel architectures [64, 137] are also explored.
In low-latency, real-time systems, FPGAs and ASICs have become the de facto platforms for accelerating neural
network, achieving low latency by implementing deeply pipelined designs, specifically tailored to the target model [83].
Heterogeneously quantized models [20, 31], or extremely low quantization schemes (e.g., binary and ternary models [85,
131]), take advantage of their high configurability to map operations directly to custom logic elements. FPGAs, in
particular, have been deployed in various real-time systems [7, 8, 25, 28, 29], due to their high flexibility and lower
entry barrier compared to ASICs. However, traditional FPGA development workflows, even when using higher levels of
abstractions, such as High-Level Synthesis (HLS), are poorly suited to adapt the functionality of modern deep learning
frameworks (e.g.,PyTorch[ 11],TensorFlow[ 3]) as they mainly target CPUs and GPUs. Therefore, deploying neural
networks on FPGAs still requires considerable experience and significant time investment.
Aiming to solve these issues, there has been a growing number of platforms automating neural network deployment on
FPGAs (see Section 12). While these platforms raise the level of abstraction and represent a significant step forward, each
platform provides a range of somewhat arbitrary and application-specific features. For example, many of these platforms
only support models defined in a single deep learning framework, or target only a single type of FPGA [ 9, 43, 67].
Additionally, the resulting hardware implementations are typically tailored to specific model architectures and precisions,
such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [56, 110, 124, 126, 127, 130] or multilayer perceptron (MLPs) [103, 114].
Moreover, these platforms rarely allow the user to choose between different implementations of the models on hardware,
which significantly reduces flexibility when balancing latency and resource consumption. Finally, many of these
frameworks [54, 103, 114] are no longer actively maintained.
In this work, we presenthls4ml[ 46]1, a free and open-source, easy-to-use, and modular platform that translates
models from common deep learning frameworks (e.g.PyTorch,Keras), into low-latency, dataflow designs for FPGAs
and ASICs.hls4mlacts as a compiler, providing user-facingfront endsthat parse trained models and translate them
into aninternal representation(IR), which is iteratively optimized before hardware lowering through a set ofoptimizers.
Back endstargeting different HLS compilers map the optimized IR to HLS implementations of layers and operators, and
create IP cores for the target model that can be synthesized and integrated into larger applications.
hls4mlsupports all major deep learning frameworks, includingPyTorch[ 11],Keras[ 24], andONNX[ 13], as well as
their quantized counterparts:QKeras[ 31],HGQ[ 20],brevitas[ 87], andQONNX[ 88, 121]. On the back end side,hls4ml
supports a growing set of HLS compilers from different vendors, includingVitis HLS[ 6] from AMD andoneAPI[ 66]
from Intel. In addition to designs for FPGAs,hls4mlfacilitates the deployment of neural networks on ASICs [ 39, 89]
throughCatapult HLS[ 106]. Model architectures that have been implemented usinghls4mlinclude MLPs [ 41],
CNNs [2, 48], recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [75], graph neural networks (GNNs) [44, 65, 86], and transformers [70,
71]. Additionally, the Extension API allows users to easily add support for any missing layers or operators, while still
leveraging the rest ofhls4ml’s implementations and optimizations. Configuring the implementation strategy, hardware
parallelization, and variable precision, users can optimize their designs for latency or resource usage without modifying
or understanding the HLS code directly. This flexibility allows for rapid prototyping and the co-design of models and
hardware. Finally,hls4mlprovides multiple environments for model verification. In addition to conventional software
emulation,hls4mlenables users to directly deploy their model on specific FPGAs (e.g., Zynq or Alveo cards) with a few
1Source code and documentation available at https://github.com/fastmachinelearning/hls4ml/ and https://fastmachinelearning.org/hls4ml/index.html.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
4 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
lines of Python code. Owing tohls4ml’s modularity and standardized interfaces, it is straightforward to integrate it
with any platform for FPGA deployment, with out-of-the-box support for commercial [5, 66] or academic [97] shells.
As a platform,hls4mlcan be used in two ways: first, as a deployment platform for various applications, including
HEP experiments [28, 29], quantum computing [ 14, 38], network firewalls [61], self-driving cars [ 48], heart signal
monitoring [80], and space exploration [108]. Second,hls4mlcan be used as a starting point for research in efficient deep
learning and hardware-model co-design [20, 92–94, 98, 118, 119, 134]. Originally presented in [41] for HEP applications
at CERN,hls4mlhas since grown into a widely used, open-source project for deep learning acceleration and research
on custom hardware (see Section 10 for more details onhls4mluse cases and applications). The project is actively
maintained with contributions from both academia and industry, is well documented and tested, and frequent supporting
tutorials, workshops, and seminars are held to foster the user community.
2 Background
FPGAs have emerged as suitable platforms for low-latency, low-power neural network inference, due to their low-level
hardware control and high configurability. While development for ASICs is also supported inhls4ml, FPGAs are the
primary target device and the focus of this paper. In the following, we present a brief overview of common design
techniques for model inference on FPGAs. More in-depth overviews are given elsewhere [18, 63, 83].
To achieve high throughput and low latency inference, there are many established design techniques.Parallelization
splits the calculations between multiple processing units (PUs), for example by partitioning the input data between
different instances of the layer implementations (data parallelization) or distributing the computation for the neurons
of a layer between PUs (model parallelization).Pipeliningpartitions the calculation in depth so that, for example,
subsequent layers are assigned to different PUs, allowing continuous data flow through the design. This allows the
design to accept new inputs before the overall inference is completed, resulting in a low initiation interval (II). Most
frameworks [15, 41, 110, 124] use both techniques to achieve maximum performance.
Many frameworks [41, 56, 122] store weights and intermediate results in on-chip memory to avoid the overhead of
accessing off-chip memory. These implementations can achieve very low latency and high throughput for models that
fit within the limited on-chip logic resources. For larger models, such as transformers, previous studies [55, 69, 123]
have proposed using high-bandwidth memory (HBM) on recent FPGAs.
For computations, many FPGAs include hardened digital signal processors (DSPs) optimized for multiply-accumulate
(MAC) operations with wide bit-widths in deep learning models. Compared to the higher abstraction in CPU and GPU
programming, arithmetic operations with these blocks reduce instruction overhead and enable more granular control
over data flow. Look-up tables (LUTs) and, sometimes, fast carry chains allow implementing MAC operations without
the need for dedicated multiplier blocks like DSPs, either by shift-and-add operations, such as the Booth multiplication
algorithm [16], or by table look-ups for small bit-width multiplications. Recent works [10, 120] propose training neural
networks that can be mapped directly to FPGA LUTs, often achieving high operating frequencies and low resource
usage with minimal accuracy loss.
Compared to the commonly used floating-point precisions on CPUs and GPUs, FPGA designs typically represent
variables in fixed-precision with lower bit-width. Quantizing a model trained with full precision to lower bit-widths
with no or little retraining is known as post-training quantization (PTQ). Higher degrees of quantization can be
achieved while maintaining accuracy by training the model directly with the intended bit-width, a technique known as
quantization-aware training (QAT). Quantization is a method particularly suited for FPGA acceleration, as the arbitrary-
precision operation can be efficiently mapped to low-level logic elements in hardware. Examples of quantization
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 5
for FPGAs include heterogeneously quantized models [ 20, 31], as well as binary and ternary models [ 85, 120, 131].
Additionally, models can also be compressed by pruning parameters, setting some weights or activations to zero. The
level of pruning is selected to balance model size with an acceptable inference accuracy loss [22, 93]. On FPGAs, pruning
can be structured to be compatible with the low-level hardware implementation [98].
Traditionally, register-transfer level (RTL) design in languages such as VHDL, (System)Verilog, or Chisel have been
used to program FPGAs. While allowing for more granular control, producing designs in this way is usually more
challenging and comes with a steep learning curve.High-level synthesis(HLS) abstracts FPGA programming significantly
by compiling high-level C/C++ or SystemC code into RTL code for specific target hardware using anHLS compiler, such
asVitis HLSorCatapult HLS. Preprocessor directives, or so-calledpragmas, are used to guide the compiler in the
hardware implementation of the design. This significantly reduces the difficulty of implementing complex designs for
ML inference. While this approach sacrifices some direct control over exact implementations, HLS has been shown to
achieve performance on par with hand-written RTL designs [72, 73] for neural networks (Section 9.6).
3 Overview
To achieve high performance, high portability, and easy extensions in the fast-moving field of ML,hls4mlis structured
in a modular fashion, mimicking modern compilers.hls4mlincludes a set offront ends, which parse high-level models
into an internal representation (IR), a set ofoptimizer passes, which optimize the model graph for the target hardware,
and a set ofback ends, which create high-performance IPs for different flavors of HLS targeting FPGAs from different
vendors. Additionally, it includes a rich set of features for model simulation and hardware validation on FPGAs/SoCs.
The flow from the initial model to the FPGA IP is illustrated in Figure 1. The users provide a trained model and
a configuration file that specifies options such as parallelization factors, variable precisions, and target clock period,
which are then parsed by the front-end parsers.2 Generally,hls4mlsupports fixed-point, exponential, ternary, and
binary data types. In the case of PTQ, variable quantization is determined by the precision set in the user configuration,
and in the case of QAT, it is automatically inferred from the quantized model (e.g., fromQKeras,QONNX). Following
that, the model graph is iteratively optimized and refined, given the user configuration and the target back end. Finally,
an FPGA/HLS project containing the generated HLS code and the supporting scripts for simulation, synthesis, and
deployment is returned to the user.
hls4mlsupports all major deep learning frameworks through dedicated front ends forKeras,PyTorch, andONNX.
Additionally,hls4mlis able to process quantized models from these frameworks; namely models implemented in
QKeras,HGQ,brevitas, andQONNX. We describe the front ends in more detail in Section 4. On the back-end side,
hls4mlkeeps the same design principles of modularity and extendability. Currently available are theVitisandVivado
back ends forVitis HLS, and its deprecated counterpartVivado HLS, for AMD/Xilinx FPGAs, theoneAPIandQuartus
back ends foroneAPI, and its deprecated counterpartIntel HLS, for Intel/Altera FPGAs, and theCatapultback end
forCatapult HLS, targeting the Siemens EDA flow. These back ends are discussed in more detail in Section 6. To
translate between the different front and back ends,hls4mlconverts the model into an IR. The IR initially replicates the
structure of the model before a set of optimizers modifies it to better suit the hardware architecture and performance
requirements. The IR and optimizers are described in more detail in Section 5. Following a similar modular approach,
hls4mlimplements a library of HLS kernel templates, each implementing the functionality of a model layer or parts
thereof. Here, each back end has its own set of templates, which is hand-optimized for the target HLS compiler. To
2For more information on the configuration parameters and commands to run these steps, see https://fastmachinelearning.org/hls4ml/api/configuration.
html and https://fastmachinelearning.org/hls4ml/intro/setup.html.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
6 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
Generic flows
Front ends Internal representation (IR)
ModelGraph
Layer
Attribute Type Variable …
…
Flow
Optimizer …
keras_to_hls
Layer parser …
pytorch_to_hls
Fn parser …
onnx_to_hls
Node parser …
Configuration
Key/Value …
Extension API
Back ends
Vivado/Vitis (+Acc)
Flow …
Type/Variable …
HLS Template …
Quartus/oneAPI
Catapult
MicroChip/Libero…
Custom parser Custom layer Custom opt.Custom template …
User API
Output
ReportFirmwareHLS Project
Input
Initial config.Model
…
Fig. 1. Model conversion and compilation flow inhls4ml.
allow greater flexibility and design space exploration different templates are often available that minimize either latency
or resources. The user has full control over which of these configurations is used and can also control the degree of
parallelism and variable precisions, both of which can be set on a per-layer basis.
Finally, it is important to note that public releases ofhls4mlsupport most types of commonly used neural networks.
MLPs and CNNs are fully supported in all front and back ends. RNNs are also supported, though currently not in the
ONNXfront end. While some graph neural networks (GNNs) have been realized usinghls4ml[ 65, 86, 95], support for
generic GNNs is currently still in development. Specifically, no support for anyPyTorch Geometricfunctionality is
currently available. Support for multi-head attention (MHA) transformer models has been introduced inhls4mlv1.2.0
via theHGQ2 front end and is currently only available in the Vitis back end. A detailed overview of the availability of
common operators is given in Tables 1 and 2. In addition,hls4mlsupports a large number of activation functions, such
as ReLU or softmax, as well as general tensor operations (e.g. reshaping, concatenation, or addition). Even though many
layers are supported, a model may not necessarily be suitable for acceleration withhls4ml. Very large or complex
models can fail to pass HLS compilation due to the on-chip, low-latency dataflow implementation ofhls4mldesigns
which can lead to high resource utilization and congestion (more details on the limitation ofhls4mlcan be found in
Section 11). Such models should be compressed through quantization and pruning, or, in some cases, consider alternative
acceleration techniques, leveraging for e.g., overlay architectures or off-chip memory. If a model contains currently
unavailable operations/layers,hls4mloffers an Extension API to add support for additional layers (Section 8), while
still relying on the implementations for existing layers, optimizers, and scripts.
4 Front ends for different ML libraries
The front end converts models from the supported frameworks mentioned above into the IR. For each deep learning
framework, there is a dedicated front end that (1) parses the model graph, and (2) extracts relevant information from
each individual layer or operation. The second step is implemented with an extensive repository of layer handlers, one
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 7
Table 1. Support for different NN layers or types in thehls4mlfront ends. Support is indicated by ✓, while not supported layers are
marked✓. Layers not supported in the respective NN frameworks are marked –.
Layer Front end
Keras 2 QKeras HGQ Keras 3 HGQ2PyTorch ONNX QONNX
Linear/Dense ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
1D/2D Convolution ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
LSTM/GRU ✓ ✓–✓–✓ ✓ ✓
Einsum ✓– –✓ ✓ ✓ ✓–
Multihead Attention ✓– –✓ ✓ ✓ ✓–
Batch Normalization ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Layer Normalization ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
GNN ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 2. Support for different layers in thehls4mlback ends. Support is indicated by✓, while not supported layers are marked✓.
Layer Back end
Vitis/Vivado Quartus/oneAPI Catapult
Linear/Dense ✓ ✓ ✓
1D/2D Convolution ✓ ✓ ✓
LSTM/GRU ✓ ✓ ✓
Einsum ✓ ✓ ✓
Multihead Attention ✓ ✓ ✓
Batch Normalization ✓ ✓ ✓
Layer Normalization ✓ ✓ ✓
GNN ✓ ✓ ✓
for an individual, or a family of supported layers or operations. Each layer handler accepts a layer object and returns
a dictionary with the necessary configuration and data for representing the layer inhls4ml’s IR. All weights in the
model are converted toNumPyarrays at this stage, and front-end specific objects are eliminated for compatibility.
4.1 Keras
Traditionally,hls4mlhas focused on models created inKeras 2and supports the most commonly used layers in
this framework. ForKeras 2, both Keras objects and serialized representations of the model, which contain detailed
information about the model architecture and layer configurations, are accepted. This allows the conversion of models
that are saved in the HDF5 format without requiring the Keras library to be installed. Direct parsing of .keras files
is not supported due to the absence of a public API for reading model configurations. However, such models can
be loaded in Keras and passed tohls4mlas in-memory objects.Keras 3introduces major changes to theKeras
library. Therefore, theKeras 3parser does not inherit from theKeras 2parser. TheKeras 3parser directly ingests a
keras.api.Model object, and reconstructs the model architecture via data dependency solving.Keras 3layer handlers
also ingest keras.api.layers.Layer objects directly, and return a dictionary with the layer configuration and weights.
When a layer type is not supported, the parser will attempt to fall back to theKeras 2layer handler (if available) to
extract the configuration.
TheKeras 2parser supports models quantized by two different QAT libraries,QKerasandHGQ, while theKeras 3
parser currently only supportsHGQ. For quantized layer types, the quantization parameters are included in the IR of
the quantized layer configuration. Quantization parameters derived from QAT libraries are enforced inhls4mland will
Manuscript submitted to ACM
8 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
override any user-provided configurations.QKerassupports three major quantization types: fixed-point integer based,
binary, and power-of-two quantization, of which are all supported byhls4ml, while the power-of-two quantization
may only be used for the weights. ForHGQmodels, a dedicated optimizer pass in the IR is invoked for precision
configuration. This involves symbolic precision propagation through the model, and all quantization parameters are
derived from explicit quantization layers converted fromHGQ, along with the weights provided. User-provided precision
configurations are discarded when converting fromHGQ, and conversions from properly definedHGQmodels are
always bit-exact up to the floating point representation limits.
4.2PyTorch
Symbolic tracing in thetorch FXframework is used to infer the architecture and configuration ofPyTorchmodels.
In general,hls4mlsupports operations implemented as both torch.nn.Module objects and stateless operators in
the torch.nn.functional module. The support forPyTorchlayers generally matches that ofKeras 2. A custom
tracer inheriting from thetorch.fx.Tracerclass is used to enable the parsing of custom layers in the Extension API
(Section 8). Sincehls4mlwas first developed to supportKeras 2models, which adopts the “channels-last” convention
for multi-dimensional tensors, many HLS kernel templates only have a “channels-last” version implemented.PyTorch
uses the “channels-first” convention in most of its operations. Therefore, an optimizer adds the necessary transpose
operations to thehls4mlIR to ensure compatibility with the “channels-last” convention.
Models trained using QAT inbrevitascan be converted to theQONNXformat using thebrevitas-ONNXexport
functionality, allowing them to be ingested by theONNXfront end described below. This approach is also common in
other frameworks [15, 122]. In addition, support for direct parsing ofbrevitasmodels, without reliance onQONNX, as
part of thePyTorchfront end is in development.
4.3ONNX
ONNXmodels are supported with direct object parsing. The converter ingests anONNXobject and parses its graph to
determine the model inputs, outputs, and all operators present in the model. Because of the fine-grained representation
of operators inONNXmodels,hls4mlrequires the model to be preprocessed, usually referred to as “cleaning”, before
conversion. Cleaning is performed using theQONNX[ 121] package, which performs constant folding, shape inference,
renaming of the nodes into human-readable names, and conversion of the graph into the “channels-last” convention.
Additionally,QONNX, as an extension of theONNXlibrary, introduces three new operators:Quant,BipolarQuant,
andTruncto enable flexible representation of quantized models.hls4mlsupports a subset of models representable
byQONNXthat are physically feasible for FPGA implementation. In thehls4mlIR, the precision is derived from the
quantization operators and enforced. Additional scaling or unscaling is applied as needed. Figure 2 illustrates a QONNX
representation of a simple one-layer MLP with a softmax output layer, compared to the representation inQKeras.
5 Internal representation and optimizer flows
5.1 Internal Representation
Thehls4mlIR aims to provide a front- and back-end agnostic representation of models. By abstracting models from
different frameworks into a uniform representation,hls4mlcan apply transformations and optimizations to a model
independent of the framework used to create it. The IR is implemented as a ModelGraph object where each node
corresponds to a layer or operator in the network. Each node contains all layer-specific information such as operation
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 9
Input
QDense
Softmax
Input
MatMul
Add
Softmax
IntQuant
IntQuant
(a) QKeras (b) QONNX
Fig. 2. Comparison of the representation of an example model consisting of a one-layer MLP with a softmax output layer inQKeras
(left) andQONNX(right).
type, weights, quantization method, and connections to other nodes. During conversion, the IR is initialized with the
layers from the original model by the front-end converter. Then, the IR undergoes a series of transformations performed
by theoptimizer flowsto reach the final state used in the code generation of the target back end.
By default,hls4mlcreates a single HLS project for the entire model, which is then synthesized into a monolithic
design. As of v1.2.0,hls4mlsupports a new feature that allows for the splitting of the model into multiple subgraphs.
This is implemented by extending the ModelGraph with the MultiModelGraph object, which splits the model at user-
defined layers, and creates independent HLS projects that can be synthesized independently. This allows for parallel
synthesis to reduce synthesis time, or potentially distributing large models over multiple chips or devices in the future.
hls4mlcurrently supports automatic stitching of the synthesized IP cores from subgraphs into a single design for the
Vivado/Vitis back ends. By running the individual synthesis in parallel, the HLS synthesis time for a quantized ResNet
for CIFAR-10 classification decreases from 7 h to 3 h on average.
5.2 Optimizer flows
Inspired by modern compilers,hls4mlimplements a series of transformations, calledoptimizer flows, that iteratively
transform the IR for the target back ends, where each flow represents a distinct optimization stage. Optimizer flows can
either be generally applicable to all models or specific to a target back end. A single flow implements multipleoptimizers,
each performing a specific transformation on the model, such as precision propagation, template instantiation, or
removing redundant operations. For instance, an optimizer may fuse batch normalizations that immediately follow an
affine projection (fully connected or convolutional layers) operation into a single node with equivalent, fused weights
when both nodes are not quantized.
5.3 User directives
In addition to the graph representation of the model itself, the ModelGraph object also holds directives regarding
the model conversion and optimization process in the form of an HLSConfig object. The HLSConfig object contains
information that cannot be derived directly from the model, such as the target back end, implementation strategy, I/O
type, and, in some cases, quantization precision and resource reuse preferences. Users provide these configurations as
Manuscript submitted to ACM
10 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
a Python dictionary. Some of the hardware-oriented configurations (e.g., I/O type, strategy) are further discussed in
Section 6.1, in conjunction with the hardware implementation of neural network kernels.
Quantization parameters are a crucial part of the model conversion process. Improperly configured quantization
parameters may introduce extra errors that accumulate throughout the model, which can lead to significant performance
degradation. Currently,hls4mlsupports fixed-point, exponential (power-of-two), ternary, and binary data types. When
the front-end framework quantizes the model properly, the quantization parameters will be stored directly in the nodes.
However, some precision information may not always be available depending on the front end used. For instance, the
accumulator3 precision is rarely available from the front-end libraries. Since v1.0.0,hls4mlis able to automatically
determine it through conservative estimation to avoid unwanted overflows when the user specifies "auto" for the
accumulator precision in the configuration. Other precision types, such as the weight, bias, and result precision, can
also be inferred automatically, depending on the layer type and the metadata it contains when "auto" is specified.
Since v1.2.0,hls4mlincludes a dedicated optimizer pass that propagates precision at the model level for bit-exactness
when the model is fully quantized, which relies only on explicitly defined quantizers and the weights provided through
interval arithmetic. User-supplied precision configurations are ignored when this optimizer pass is enabled.
6 Back ends and hardware implementations
hls4mlgenerates HLS code through a set of manually optimized templates for different layers and operations, which
are combined to represent a complete model to be synthesized. Each back end includes a set of dedicated templates and
optimizers. Some back ends, such as those forVivado HLSandVitis HLS, may share some templates and optimizers
because of their similarity. The optimizers will register the back-end specific templates and apply them to the IR. They
also perform back-end specific optimizations, such as pragma insertion, precision propagation, constant folding, and
others. When creating an HLS project, the back ends will also generate the necessary utility files such as TCL scripts
for synthesizing the project, test benches, and bridge code for calling the generated libraries directly from high-level
Python functions. After synthesizing the generated HLS code, the back ends can parse the synthesis reports and display
a concise summary of the resource usage and latency.
6.1 Hardware implementations
In the following, we provide a brief overview of hardware implementations inhls4ml, with an emphasis on constant
matrix-vector multipliers (CMVM) and activations, with are core building blocks of neural networks. Further details
on specific layer implementations can be found in the corresponding publications for MLPs [ 41], CNNs [2, 48] and
RNNs [1, 75]. In addition, we discuss the various strategies and data flow options supported inhls4ml, each of which
provides a trade-off between the resources used and inference latency.
Constant matrix-vector multiplication, strategies, and parallelism:The CMVM operation is a fundamental building
block of neural networks.hls4mlplaces significant emphasis on its efficient implementations, with three supported
strategies:Latency,Resource, andDistributed Arithmetic. To control the degree of parallelism,hls4mlallows users to set
theReuse Factor(RF). Given a weight matrix of size𝑀×𝑁and a reuse factor𝑅𝐹,hls4mlimplementations of CMVM
are such that there are no more than 𝑁_𝑀𝑈𝐿𝑇= 𝑀·𝑁
𝑅𝐹 multiplications per clock cycle (e.g., Fig. 3a). Different strategies
will differently impact latency and resource consumption of a layer, and users are advised to choose based on their
design goals. The availability of a particular strategy for a layer varies across back ends.
3The accumulator holds the intermediate results in a layer for the MAC operations.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 11
TheLatencystrategy implements fully unrolled CMVM with weights directly embedded into multiplier circuits,
allowing the HLS compiler to perform intensive optimizations, such as removing multiplications with zeros, replacing
multiplications with specific constants with shift-and-add operations, or reordering the multiplications to improve
timing. The RF is implemented as a compiler directive that limits the number of parallel multiplications and determines
the initiation interval of the CMVM operation. The HLS compiler determines the exact ordering and hardware primitive
for the MAC operations, based on the data type, precision, and other conditions (e.g. target hardware and frequency). In
cases where DSP blocks or other hardened multipliers are used for the MAC operations, a larger RF will usually result
in reusing those blocks and lower resource consumption. However, when MAC operations are implemented in fabric,
such as LUTs and fast carriers with shift-and-addition operations, a higher RF will not necessarily result in resource
reduction, but will still increase the II. Depending on the underlying compiler and hardware mappings, the resource
usage may even increase. Therefore, the Latency strategy is suitable for small models, targeting very low inference
latencies. Additionally, the RF should be tuned carefully as it may not yield resource savings and may increase II.
In theResourcestrategy, the CMVM implementation stores the weights in BRAM and explicitly controls the degree
of parallelism in by specifying the number of MAC operations performed in parallel per clock cycle (Fig. 3a). Weights
stored in BRAM are partitioned into 𝑅𝐹 blocks, each of size 𝑁_𝑀𝑈𝐿𝑇 (Fig. 3b). Each clock cycle, a slice of 𝑁_𝑀𝑈𝐿𝑇
weights is accessed and processed together with the inputs by a MAC unit, leading to an II of𝑅𝐹 clock cycles. Depending
on the chunk size 𝑁_𝑀𝑈𝐿𝑇 , the weights may be stored in multiple BRAMs to increase the number of ports for parallel
read. The exact implementation of the MAC unit will depend on the bit-width of the weights and inputs, as well as
compiler heuristics. In the case of DSP-based MAC units, it can be implemented as cascaded DSP tiles, whereas for
LUT-based MAC units, the exact implementation differs heavily depending on the precisions, target frequency and
other factors. However, for specific operand types,hls4mlcan overwrite compiler primitives; for e.g. multiplications
with power-of-two weights can be implemented using shifters explicitly, while multiplications with binary and ternary
weights can be realized with AND and XOR gates. Increasing the RF in the Resource strategy directly reduces the
number of MAC units used, thus reducing resource consumption. The Resource strategy is better suited for large models,
since the Latency strategy can fail to compile in these cases due to full loop unrolling. However, due to the overhead in
data movement and the use of general MAC units, the end-to-end latency for the Resource strategy is typically higher
than for the Latency strategy with the same RF.
TheDistributed Arithmetic(DA) strategy implements the CMVM operation by explicitly decomposing it into an adder
graph with only shift-and-add (or subtract) operations, where any bit-wise sparsity in the weights will be explicitly
exploited. This strategy relies on an external library,da4ml[ 113], for generating and optimizing the adder graph
corresponding to the specific CMVM problems. Compared to the Latency strategy with an RF of one, the DA strategy
usually has lower fabric resource utilization and latency. DSPs or other hardened multipliers will not be used due to
the lack of explicit multiplications. However, the DA strategy in general does not support RFs greater than one since
the generated adder graph effectively unrolls the entire CMVM operation. Hence, in case of moderately large CMVM
problems consuming significant amount of hardened multipliers (e.g., DSPs), the user is encouraged to try the Latency
or Resource strategy with a higher RF instead of the DA strategy.
Some layers, e.g., convolutional layers lowered to CMVM through the im2col [ 21] transformation, may perform
identical CMVM operations multiple times on different inputs in one forward pass. In this case, the parallelism between
CMVM operations is controlled by theParallelization Factor(PF). The PF controls the number of CMVM operations
that are performed in parallel, and it is independent of the strategy and RF used for the CMVM operation. A higher PF
reduces the II of one layer at the expense of higher resource usage. Like RF in the Resource strategy, the PF chosen
Manuscript submitted to ACM
12 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
Reshaped
N✕M Weight Matrix
x3
x1
x2…
xN
W1,3W1,1 W1,2 … W1,P
N-input vector
W2,3W2,1 W2,2
……
W2,P…
WR,3WR,1 WR,2 WR,P…
Control
Logic
x
x
…
x
Row processed in 1st clock cycle
Row processed in RF-th clock cycle
y3
y1
y2…
yM
M-output vector
Control
Logic
MULT
RF = 1
RF = 2
RF = 4
MULT
MULT
MULT
MULT
MULT
MULT
(a) (b)
Fig. 3. (a) Illustration of the effect of different RF values for the outer product of two two-vectors. (b) Example CMVM inhls4ml
with the Resource strategy. Given a linear layer with 𝑁 inputs, 𝑀outputs and reuse factor RF, there will be 𝑃= 𝑀·𝑁
RF multipliers
operating in parallel. In each clock cycle, the control logic selects 𝑃 out of the 𝑁 inputs and feeds them to the multipliers, with wrap
around if 𝑃>𝑁 . The 𝑁×𝑀 kernel is reshaped and mapped to on-chip memories such that 𝑃 elements can be accessed in parallel in
each clock cycle. The products are accumulated accordingly at the precision specified to form the output.
must fully divide the number of CMVM operations needed in one forward pass for the layer to avoid any remainder.
The total II of one layer is determined by the PF (if available), RF, and strategy together.
Activations:Piecewise linear activations (e.g., ReLU, Leaky ReLU) are implemented using multiplexers. Other activa-
tions (e.g., tanh, sigmoid) are implemented as lookup tables4, which are populated at compile-time. The use of look-up
tables guarantees constant and efficient calculation of the activation, regardless of its complexity. Given the precision of
the layer input, hls4ml will generate a look-up table storing all possible output values of the activation function for each
possible input value. In case the user-specified table size is smaller than the generated table,hls4mlwill drop the least
significant bits from the input to fit the table size. Depending on the table size and the precision, look-up tables can be
implemented as BRAM or LUTRAM, which is determined by the HLS compiler. For example, on AMD FPGAs, BRAM
can be implemented as 18 bit wide by 1024 bit deep true dual-port RAM. Since the variable precision rarely exceeds 18
bits, one BRAM is used for each table of 1,024 elements. In the case of parallel accesses, the HLS compiler may duplicate
the BRAM to ensure single-clock-cycle access. Empirically, we determine that activation look-up tables consume a
small amount of resources and that most activations can be sufficiently approximated with a modest look-up table of
∼2048 entries; though heavily quantized models may use even smaller look up tables.
Data flow, scheduling and I/O types:Models deployed withhls4mltargetdataflowarchitectures, in which each
operation is mapped to a dedicated hardware function synthesized into a separate region of the FPGA fabric. This
approach enables pipeline parallelism across the computation graph allowing for low latency and high throughput. In
general, dataflow is achieved through directives such as the #pragma HLS dataflow inVitis HLSor tasks inoneAPI.
The exact scheduling of layers and data movement between them is, however, determined by the HLS compiler and
depends on a number of factors, including the target FPGA platform, clock frequency/uncertainty, and model size. For
4Not to be confused with the LUT primitive on FPGAs.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 13
Partitioned
Input
FIFO
Partitioned
Output
Partitioned
Output
Partitioned
N✕M Weight Matrix
N-element Array
31 2 … N
31 2 … N
N+3N+1 N+2 … 2N
… …
mN+3mN+1 mN+2 … MN
… …
31 2 … M
+
✕ ✕ ✕ ✕
+ + +
2N+32N+1 2N+2 … 2N
31 2 … N
(a) io_parallel (b) io_stream
Partition the array
…
31 2 … M
>0? >0? >0? >0?
Linear Layer with M unitsReLU
H✕W✕C Tensor
31 2 … C 1
Concatenate every C values 
into one new item
Insert into a FIFO
(the FIFO will contain N=HxW items)
1
Read sequentially from FIFO
31 2 … C
Parallel matrix-vector multiplication
31 2 … K
1
FIFO
31 2 … N
Write to FIFO
Unpack data
Pack data
FIFO
31 2 … N
…
ReLU 2D Convolution with K output filters
1 Unpack / ReLU / Pack 1
Fig. 4. Schematics of the computation of an MLP model implemented using parallel data transfer (left) and a CNN model implemented
using streaming data transfer (right). In the Resource strategy, the number of parallel MAC operations executed in each cycle is
determined by the RF and PF. In the case of the MLP, 𝑀·𝑁
RF multiplications are executed in parallel each clock cycle.
example, increasing the clock frequency will often lead to higher latency, since the HLS compiler automatically inserts
more pipeline stages to better achieve timing closure during place and route.
The data flow between layers is a crucial part of the design.hls4mlsupports two types of data transfer between
layers:io_parallelandio_stream(example in Figure 4). Theio_parallelsetting directly wires the output of one
layer to the input of the next layer, allowing for maximum throughput and minimum latency. This is the default
data transfer type forhls4ml, which is suitable for small models with moderate resource usage. On the other hand,
io_stream uses FIFO buffers between layers. This is typically used with larger models where some layer requires a
significant II, and the data processed by the previous layer need to be buffered before being consumed by the next layer.
Depending on the buffer depth, the HLS compiler may elect to use shift registers or BRAM to implement the FIFOs. By
default,hls4mluses a conservative depth for these buffers, which can result in unnecessary resource overheads. In the
Vivado and Vitis back ends, a special optimizer is implemented to optimize the depth of these FIFOs by performing an
RTL co-simulation of the model and recording the maximum occupation of each FIFO buffer [17]. The optimizer then
sets the final depth for each FIFO to the maximum occupation plus one.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
14 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
6.2 IP Core back ends
Currently,hls4mlprovides five back ends supporting HLS compilers from AMD/Xilinx, Intel/Altera, and Siemens
EDA. There are two back ends for AMD/Xilinx FPGAs: the Vivado back end, targeting the discontinuedVivado HLS,
and the Vitis back end, targetingVitis HLS2022.2 or newer. These two back ends are best supported with the most
complete feature set. They support the most layer types, including fully connected (dense), convolutional, recurrent,
many activations, and Einstein summation layers. Both io_parallel and io_stream are supported. All strategies for
the CMVM operation are supported, including Latency, Resource, and Distributed Arithmetic. Due to their popularity,
many optimized layers exist for special configurations, such as pointwise, depthwise, and separable convolutions.
Similarly, there are two related back ends for Intel/Altera FPGAs: the Quartus back end, targeting the discontinued
Intel HLS, and the oneAPI back end, targetingoneAPI2025.0 5. Both io_parallel and io_stream are supported in
these back ends. In the streaming implementations, the oneAPI back end follows the data flow architecture more closely
than the Quartus back end, where individual layers run independently as separate tasks, with handshaking and data
transfers between tasks done through the streams implemented as pipes. Unlike Vivado/Vitis back ends, the Quartus
and oneAPI back ends do not provide distinct strategy implementations for the CMVM operations and generally use a
resource-optimized approach.
hls4mlalso provides a back end forCatapult HLS, developed in collaboration with Siemens EDA and guided by
evolving industry requirements for edge ML applications.Catapult HLSis widely used for the development of ASICs,
while also supporting FPGA designs, making it a versatile solution for synthesizing C++/SystemC specifications across
various hardware targets. Both Latency and Resource strategies are supported, and the io_type can be configured
as either io_parallel or io_stream. For streaming implementations, the Catapult back end supports bottom-up
synthesis, leveraging Catapult’s Bottom-Up (BUP) flow to enable hierarchical and scalable hardware generation. This
methodology enables individual model layers to be synthesized independently without requiring the entire model to
be available. Each layer is synthesized into a separate RTL implementation and reusable Catapult library component.
This divide-and-conquer approach simplifies design management, supports incremental synthesis (e.g., eliminating the
need to re-synthesize the whole model when modifying a single layer), and enhances scalability by reducing memory
requirements on the synthesis servers.
6.3 Accelerator back ends
The accelerator back ends are extensions of the IP core back ends, which enable end-to-end design-to-deployment
flows for specific FPGA/SoC platforms. The accelerator extensions are available for the Vivado and Vitis back ends,
with oneAPI currently under development. The Vivado accelerator back end embeds the generated IP core into a larger
design containing an DMA core and other necessary utilities for host communication. Beyond IP integration, the back
end also facilitates communication between the IP core and a system’s memory controller unit (MCU) or the host
CPU via a custom device driver. Two different Vitis accelerator back ends are currently being integrated intohls4ml.
The first uses theVitis IP flow, which closely resembles the Vivado accelerator back end in functionality, primarily
targeting the AMD/Xilinx Zynq boards. The second one utilizes theVitis System Design Flow, which enables the creation
of complete applications targeting datacenter AMD/Xilinx Alveo accelerators. In this case, the accelerator back end
generates a Vitis IP kernel along with a wrapper to facilitate data transfers between the accelerator and the host CPU.
This approach allows compiling one or multiple instances of the resulting IP into a binary file that can be directly loaded
5Support for Altera FPGAs was dropped fromoneAPIversion 2025.1, to be replaced by dedicated Altera software.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 15
onto the accelerator card from the host. Additionally, the back end produces multi-threaded host code to manage kernel
execution and optimize data movement. This setup enables overlapping PCIe data transfers with kernel computation,
effectively multiplexing communication and processing. In practice, this approach has achieved core occupancy levels of
up to 96 % of the theoretical throughput, as estimated from the II and the kernel’s operating frequency. Multi-kernel and
multi-accelerator configurations have demonstrated throughput exceeding 1.4 million inferences per second.hls4ml’s
generic design and interfaces are showcased by its integration with other FPGA shells, such as Coyote v2 [97], which
also allows seamless deployment of applications on Alveo boards.
7 Community tools for model optimization and co-design
With the growing need for higher performance and accuracy, machine learning has shifted towards techniques such as
quantization and pruning to efficiently deploy models on a variety of hardware. Such techniques can also behardware-
aware, in which the quantization precision or sparsity pattern is determined by the specific computation or memory
model of the target device. Model-hardware co-design often yields the best performance with the lowest drop in
accuracy. Following this trend, the community has proposed a growing number of co-design tools. We introduce some
tools proposed by the community that are supported byhls4ml.
7.1 QKeras
QKerasis a widely used QAT library built on top ofKeras 2, developed by Google in collaboration with some of the
hls4mlauthors [ 30].QKeraswas the first QAT framework to be natively supported inhls4ml. The library supports
three quantization types: fixed-point integer, binary, and power-of-two quantization, and provides drop-in replacements
for manyKeras 2layers with the corresponding quantized version. To define a quantized model withQKeras, one
needs to replace the corresponding Keras layer with the correspondingQKerascounterpart (e.g., Conv2D→QConv2D,
Dense→QDense), and specify the target quantization type and precision. AutoQKeras, a hyperparameter tuning tool,
may be used to automatically search for the best quantization precision for each layer in the model given a set of
constraints on the model size, latency, and accuracy [30].QKerashas been adopted by various applications, including
image classification with quantized CNNs [2], ternary neural networks for network traffic filtering [61], low-precision
models for jet tagging at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [30, 86], and muon tracking [111].
7.2 High-granularity quantization
High-granularity quantization (HGQ) [20] is a QAT library built on top ofKerasthat applies differentiable quantization
to weights and activations at a sub-layer granularity. For models with unrolled CMVM operations, quantization
granularity down to the per-parameter level can be used to exploit the FPGA’s fine-grained parallelism.HGQsupports
only fixed-point integer quantization, treating both binary and power-of-two quantization as special cases of the
1-bit quantization. Allowing learnable bit-widths to reach 0 bits automatically includes pruning as a special case of
quantization.HGQprovides an accurate and differentiable resource usage estimation for the quantized model in the
form of effective bit operations (EBOPs), a proxy for computational effort. This metric is used as a regularization term in
the loss function, controlled by a hyperparameter𝛽, which allows the user to control the trade-off between accuracy and
resource usage during training. On models with unrolled CMVM operations,HGQdemonstrates significant advantages
over other model compression techniques, with an on-chip LUT usage reduction of 50% to 95%, DSP usage reduction of
50% to 100%, and a latency reduction up to 80% with no inference performance degradation [20, 112]. There are two
Manuscript submitted to ACM
16 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
versions ofHGQ:HGQ1 based onKeras 2, andHGQ2 based onKeras 3. Both libraries are tightly integrated with
hls4ml, and no user intervention is required to generate bit-exact HLS designs from the quantized models.
7.3 Distributed arithmetic
Distributed arithmetic is a technique for implementing fixed-point multipliers in hardware via shift-and-add operations.
da4ml[ 113] is a library that implements CMVM operations with an adder graph structure. The adder graph inda4ml
is optimized by a set of heuristics to minimize the number of adders weighted by their bit-width, including common
sub-expression elimination (CSE).da4mltargets unrolled CMVM operations, which constitute the dominant on-chip
resource consumption for latency-critical models generated byhls4ml. In contrast to other optimization techniques,
da4mlis an algorithm transformation at implementation time, usually taking only a few seconds, which does not
change the model’s output by a single bit relative to the corresponding fixed-point implementation. When applied to
models trained withHGQ,da4mlcan achieve further LUT usage reduction of up to ∼1/3depending on the specific
model, while completely eliminating the DSP usage [20, 113].
For some models that require the unrolling of large loops, especially of those contain many multiplication by zero,
the HLS code generated directly withhls4mlmay be unsynthesizable, depending on the HLS compiler. They may,
however, be synthesized withda4ml[ 95, 112] due to its explicit loop unrolling and resource reduction. For each CMVM
operation implemented withda4ml, an accurate estimate of LUT usage is also provided. Theda4mllibrary is tightly
integrated withhls4ml, and setting the layer strategy to "distributed_arithmetic" in thehls4mlconfiguration
will enable the distributed arithmetic implementation for the corresponding layers.
7.4 DSP- and BRAM-aware pruning
Model pruning is an effective way to reduce the resource utilization of a model. However, the benefit of unstructured
pruning is limited for designs where the multipliers are reused, and it is necessary to prune the weights in an organized
manner aligned to the specific on-chip primitives used. The DSP- and BRAM-aware pruning algorithm [98] is imple-
mented in a submodule ofhls4mlbased onQKeraswith objectives constructed directly corresponding to reductions
in on-chip primitive usage. In each case, the algorithm solves a Knapsack problem where weights in the model are
assigned an importance value and a hardware cost. Given a certain resource capacity, the algorithm identifies which
weights to prune. As a basic objective, the model can be optimized for sparsity itself in an unstructured approach.
However, for a more structured approach, hardware-specific metrics are available. For FPGAs, these can be registers,
DSPs, BRAM, or all of them simultaneously. For instance, all weights processed by a single DSP can be grouped and
pruned together, and hence a DSP block can be removed from the design once a group of weights is pruned. Depending
on the specific application, reductions in DSP usage by factors ranging from 2.2×to 12.2×and BRAM usage reductions
by factors ranging from 1.4×to 5.2×with minimal accuracy degradation have been demonstrated [98].
7.5 Symbolic expression
hls4mlincludes a symbolic regression (SR) interface for creating HLS designs based on analytic expressions. SR aims
to find a closed-form mathematical expression, containing operators such as exp(·), sin(·), cos(·), that describe the
mapping between given input and output data. These expressions can be efficiently implemented in hardware, especially
if the functions are approximated with look-up tables, making them suitable for low-latency applications. Support for
building efficient IPs implementing SR models is included inhls4mlon top of the Vivado/Vitis back ends, leveraging the
built-in code generation functionality. Specifically, the SR back end supports the translation of expressions represented
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 17
as strings or SymPy objects, obtained through tools likepySR[ 34] or SymbolNet [118]. The functions within expressions
can be implemented either using the native Xilinx HLS math library or approximated via LUTs, giving users an option
to find the desired balance between accuracy, resource usage, and latency.
7.6 Surrogate models
The rapid generation of HLS designs for various models with different hardware configurations opens up the possibility
of systematic studies of the design space. However, waiting for HLS synthesis results is often impractical and lengthy.
An alternative is to use surrogate models, which can accurately predict the model resource utilization and latency. This
can assist in making design choices by providing fast and accurate hardware resource estimates for different model
parameter choices. One example isrule4ml[ 96], an open-source tool that uses an MLP surrogate model to predict the
resource usage of MLPs generated withhls4ml. Trained on over 15,000 HLS synthesis results covering a wide range
of MLP parameter space andhls4mldesign configurations, it achieves predictions within 10% of the true synthesis
results in ∼80% of test cases. In a related approach,wa-hls4ml, over 100,000 models were generated, and a graph neural
network, lui-GNN, was trained as the surrogate model [58].
7.7 Automated neural architecture and hardware co-design
Neural architecture co-design (NAC) [134] is a pipeline for neural architecture search and network compression in a
two-stage approach based on the “Once-for-All” paradigm [19] to discover hardware efficient models. This approach
consists of a global search stage that explores a wide range of architectures while considering hardware constraints,
followed by a local search stage that fine-tunes and compresses the most promising candidates through QAT and
pruning. Currently, the hardware cost is quantified using bit operations (BOPs), but integration ofhls4mlresource
and latency estimates is underway. NAC has been demonstrated with Bragg peak finding in materials science and jet
classification in HEP, achieving models with improved accuracy, smaller latencies, or reduced resource utilization.
A recent advancement in this direction is MetaML-Pro [93], a co-optimization framework that automates design
space exploration across neural network and hardware abstraction levels. It supports reusable optimization tasks, such
as pruning, quantization, and scaling, and enables top-down and bottom-up information flow between software and
hardware stages. By integrating tools likehls4mland leveraging Bayesian optimization, MetaML-Pro efficiently balances
latency, accuracy, and resource usage, and has been demonstrated on jet tagging models for HEP. Complementary to
MetaML-Pro, another recent framework extends co-design principles to incorporate trustworthiness by optimizing not
only for accuracy and efficiency but also for uncertainty estimation [94]. It introduces Bayesian CNNs with Monte Carlo
Dropout and automates trade-offs among predictive accuracy, computational cost, and model calibration, supporting
use cases such as safety-critical inference on FPGAs.
7.8 SoC integration
The Embedded Scalable Platform (ESP) is an open-source research framework for designing and prototyping hetero-
geneous system-on-chip (SoC) architectures using a modular, tile-based approach [ 78]. It supports the automated
integration of hardware accelerators, processors, memory tiles, and I/O components into an RTL SoC design. ESP
integrates withhls4mlto enable end-to-end deployment of machine learning models as hardware accelerators [ 51].
Afterhls4mlgenerates a synthesizable hardware block from a neural network, ESP wraps it with standard interfaces
and connects it to the rest of the SoC, automatically generating testbenches, drivers, and software applications for
Manuscript submitted to ACM
18 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
verification and experimentation. This combined workflow enables the design from a high-level ML model to complete
system-level ASIC implementation. FPGA-based emulation and validation are also supported.
8 User-defined functionality
Whilehls4mlsupports a wide range of neural networks from a variety of libraries, users may wish to include custom
operations in their designs. For layers that are not natively supported byhls4ml, users need to provide their own HLS
implementation. If these are of wider interest to the community, they can be fully integrated into and contributed to the
tool. However, when full integration is not desired,hls4mlcan be extended via the Extension API, available for both
theKeras 2andPyTorchfront ends, and all supported back ends. The Extension API allows users to leverage most
ofhls4ml’s rich infrastructure for other layers, optimizers, and HLS templates, while enabling them to implement
the missing operators for their target applications. For this, the front end, IR, and back end must all be extended to
support the new layer. On the front end side, this requires a custom layer handler function to parse the properties of
the new layer. A class inheriting from the base layer class in thehls4mlIR must also be defined. Finally, the back end
requires Python templates for the configuration, function calls, as well as the custom HLS code of the new layer. These
components are then registered withhls4mlthrough the Extension API. Optionally, optimizers for the new layer can
also be registered. A complete example can be found in thehls4mldocumentation online 6. A practical example can be
found in Reference [86], where within the context of an interaction network for jet tagging at CERN, the Extension
API has been used to implement a customKeras 2projection layer, consisting of left- and right-multiplication by graph
adjacency matrices. In addition to extendinghls4mlto support new layers, this mechanism could also be used to
provide custom HLS implementations for existing layers, to e.g. optimize the design for a specific application or use
different design techniques.
9 Evaluation
Given the breadth of possible applications forhls4ml, only a fraction of its capabilities can be demonstrated here. The
initial performance studies for the different types of networks supported byhls4mlcan be found in the respective
publications [1, 2, 41, 48, 70, 71, 75]. Additionally, prior works have shown acceleration of larger CNNs (ResNet- and
UNet-like architectures) [17, 42] as well as large-scale, distributed models over a cluster of FPGAs [77, 115] withhls4ml.
Here, we instead present quantitative results obtained with thehls4mlframework for a variety of benchmark models
as new baselines for future works, with the aim of highlighting more recently added capabilities, such as the oneAPI
and Catapult HLS back ends. As a community driven project, we also highlight the benefits of the evolvinghls4ml
ecosystem. Therefore, results obtained using theHGQquantization library and the new DA strategy are presented.
These are post-route results of designs generated byhls4mltargeting AMD Xilinx UltraScale+ FPGAs (XCVU9P and
XCVU13P), or an Altera Agilex7 FPGA. We further highlight the wide range of applications enabled byhls4mlby
discussing models implemented on ASICs using the Catapult back end, and studies evaluating the performance of the
HLS code generated byhls4ml.
9.1 High-level feature jet tagger
The high-level jet tagger is a commonly used benchmark for low-latency neural networks on FPGAs [90]. The task is to
classify jets (collimated particle showers at collider physics experiments), into five classes based on their originating
6https://fastmachinelearning.org/hls4ml/advanced/extension.html
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 19
particle. The inputs for each jet are 16 scalar values representing physics-motivated high-level features. The model
architecture employed is an MLP from [41]. The results targeting an AMD XCVU9P FPGA are shown in Table 3.
All models use the io_parallel data transfer strategy. The models are quantized withHGQand deployed with
both the built-in Latency strategy and the DA strategy provided byda4ml. ForHGQtrained models, the results
shown in different rows are quantized to different bit-widths, regularized by different 𝛽 values. The results show major
improvements when usingHGQover the previous baseline presented in [ 31], shown in the table labeled asQKeras.
The new DA strategy further reduces the resource usage and latency of the designs.
In addition, we add the maximum achieved clock frequencyF max for the models when targeting a 1 GHz clock period
in Table 4 obtained for these designs with the default settings in Vivado and Vitis 2023.2 as a reference. The results show
that the DA strategy may achieve lower latency and comparable or higherF max compared to the Latency strategy. We
further show results on a more resource-constrained AMD XC7A35T FPGA in Table 5. In the Latency strategy, the most
accurate model failed to place due to insufficient resources, while the DA strategy successfully placed all models, with
the most accurate model utilizing more than 90% of LUTs on the device. This demonstrates thathls4mlalso enables
deployment of models on low-end, resource-constrained FPGAs. Compared to the larger FPGAs, the main difference
is reflected in the latency and the clock frequency. Since the AMD XC7A35T is an FPGA of a lower speed grade, the
HLS compiler inserts additional register stages to meet timing, leading to higher latency and resource consumption.
Additionally, the absolute increase in resources, compared to the larger FPGA, can be attributed to logic duplication
during place-and-route, again in order to achieve timing closure.
Table 3. Accuracy, resource consumption, latency, and initiation intervals (IIs) of the jet tagging models. Resources are reported after
out of context place-and-route with an AMD XCVU9P FPGA. The clock period used is 5 ns for all designs shown, except for the design
marked with *, which used 7 ns. All designs use no BRAM. The results for QKeras trained models are cited from [31] and for HGQ
cited from [113].
Trainer Strategy Accuracy Latency (cc) DSP LUT FF II
QKeras [98]∗ Latency 76.3% 15 [105 ns] 5,504 175 3,036 2
QKeras [93] Latency 76.1% 10 [50 ns] 13,042 70 N/A 1
HGQ Latency 76.9% 5 (23.6 ns) 55 [0.8%] 13,303 [1.1%] 2,374 [0.1%] 1
HGQ Latency 76.5% 5 (23.1 ns) 30 [0.4%] 6,715 [0.6%] 1,348 [0.1%] 1
HGQ Latency 75.9% 3 (12.7 ns) 15 [0.2%] 3,044 [0.3%] 641 [0.0%] 1
HGQ DA 76.9% 5 (23.4 ns) 0 11,978 [1.0%] 2,117 [0.1%] 1
HGQ DA 76.5% 4 (18.0 ns) 0 6,067 [0.5%] 1,178 [0.0%] 1
HGQ DA 75.9% 3 (12.1 ns) 0 2,891 [0.2%] 651 [0.0%] 1
Table 4. Accuracy, resource consumption, latency, andF max of the jet tagging models trained in HGQ [20] when targeting 1 GHz clock.
Resource reported are after out of context place-and-route with an AMD XCVU9P FPGA (part number: xcvu9p-flga2104-2L-e). All
designs use no BRAM and have an II of one cycle.
Trainer Strategy Fmax Accuracy Latency (cc) DSP LUT FF
HGQ Latency 739 MHz 76.9% 37 (50.1 ns) 57 [0.8%] 14,624 [1.2%] 21,365 [0.9%]
HGQ Latency 705 MHz 76.5% 31 (44.0 ns) 30 [0.4%] 7,656 [0.6%] 11,513 [0.5%]
HGQ Latency 694 MHz 75.9% 30 (43.2 ns) 17 [0.2%] 3,765 [0.3%] 5,845 [0.2%]
HGQ DA 713 MHz 76.9% 28 (39.3 ns) 0 12,465 [1.1%] 18,004 [0.8%]
HGQ DA 719 MHz 76.5% 23 (32.0 ns) 0 6,297 [0.5%] 9,524 [0.4%]
HGQ DA 756 MHz 75.9% 21 (27.8 ns) 0 2,886 [0.2%] 4,667 [0.2%]
Manuscript submitted to ACM
20 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
Table 5. Accuracy, resource consumption, latency, andF max of the jet tagging models trained in HGQ [20]. Resource reported are
after out of context place-and-route with an AMD XC7A35T FPGA (part number: xc7a35tlcsg325-2L). All designs use no BRAM
and have an II of one cycle.
Trainer Strategy Fmax Accuracy Latency (cc) DSP LUT FF
HGQ Latency - 76.9% Place failed
HGQ Latency 187 MHz 76.5% 53 (284.0 ns) 30 [33.3%] 11,091 [53.3%] 24,649 [59.3%]
HGQ Latency 182 MHz 76.0% 45 (246.7 ns) 17 [18.9%] 5,565 [26.8%] 11,330 [27.2%]
HGQ DA 172 MHz 76.9% 58 (337.4 ns) 0 19,467 [93.6%] 36,995 [88.9%]
HGQ DA 185 MHz 76.5% 50 (270.1 ns) 0 10,692 [51.4%] 20,407 [49.1%]
HGQ DA 176 MHz 75.9% 46 (261.1 ns) 0 5,455 [26.2%] 9,952 [23.9%]
On the same task, we also processed aQKerastrained model with 76.9% accuracy using the oneAPI back end, and
evaluated its performance usingoneAPI2025.0 andQuartus23.1. The results are given in Table 6. Given the model’s
small size, we continue using io_parallel for data transfer between the layers, and we fully unroll the layers. For this
compiler, we use different compiler flags for different optimization targets. We found that the lowest latency can be
obtained when requesting the lowest target frequency simultaneously with the latency optimization target. As this
model has an II of one under this configuration, its throughput is proportional to the clock frequency given a continuous
data stream. Therefore, it is possible to trade off between latency and throughput by adjusting the target frequency.
Table 6. Resource consumption, latency, andF max of the jet taggingQKerasmodels usingoneAPI. All designs have an accuracy
of 76.9%. Resources reported are after out of context place-and-route, as reported byQuartus, with an Altera Agilex7 FPGA (part
number: AGFB014R24A2E2V). The latency is measured first input to first output, reported both in clock cycles and in nanoseconds
if running atF max. The optimization target is an option given to the icpx compiler, unrelated to thehls4mlstrategy. The default
option, obtained by not explicitly specifying an optimization target, optimizes for maximum frequency, and turns on hyper-optimized
handshaking. All designs shown have negligible MLAB, RAM, and DSP usage (less than 0.01%) and an II of one.
Opt. Target TargetF max Fmax Latency (cc) ALM ALUT FF
Latency 200 MHz 341 MHz 21 [62 ns] 11,434 [2.3%] 21,471 [2.2%] 8,864 [0.45%]
Latency 480 MHz 614 MHz 50 [81 ns] 12,085 [2.5%] 22,551 [2.3%] 31,243 [1.6%]
Default 480 MHz 782 MHz 90 [115 ns] 13,576 [2.8%] 24,319 [2.5%] 40,051 [2.1%]
9.2 Street View House Numbers classifier
Classification of the house numbers in images from the Street View House Numbers (SVHN) dataset [84] is a common
benchmark for computer vision tasks. We show the results from [ 20] and [ 2], where both used the same model
architecture as in [2]: a CNN with 3 convolutional layers, 3 max pooling layers, and 2 fully connected layers. The
detailed description of the architecture can be found in both works. ForHGQtrained models, the results shown in
different rows are quantized to different bit-widths, regularized by different 𝛽 values. The results are shown in Table 7.
All designs shown are using PF= 1(each convolution kernel is applied once per clock cycle) and io_stream. Compared
to the previous results obtained in [2] withhls4ml, the new results use significantly fewer on-chip resources while
retaining the same accuracy. As in the previous section, we find that the DA strategy offers improved performance
compared to the Latency one, most notably by eliminating all DSP usage, while reductions in LUTs, FFs, and latency
are less pronounced. However, this advantage might not transfer to cases where high variable precision is required, and
all cases with an RF larger than one, which are not supported in the DA strategy.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 21
Table 7. Accuracy, resource usage, and latency of the SVHN classifier models. Reported resource usage after out of context place-and-
route with an AMD XCVU9P FPGA. The clock period used is 5 ns. The results forQKerastrained models are cited from [ 2], and the
HGQtrained models are cited from [20].
Trainer Strategy Accuracy Latency (cc) DSP LUT (k) FF (k) BRAM II (cc)
QKerasLatency 94.% 1,035 [5.2𝜇s] 174 [2.54%] 111 [9.4%] 33 [1.4%] 67.0 [3.1%] 1,030
QKerasLatency 88.% 1,059 [5.3𝜇s] 72 [1.05%] 48 [4.1%] 15 [0.63%] 32.5 [1.5%] 1,029
HGQ Latency 93.9% 1,050 [5.3𝜇s] 58 [0.85%] 69 [5.8%] 28 [1.2%] 32.0 [1.5%] 1,029
HGQ Latency 93.1% 1,061 [5.3𝜇s] 30 [0.44%] 47 [4.0%] 21 [0.89%] 28.0 [1.3%] 1,029
HGQ Latency 91.9% 1,058 [5.3𝜇s] 15 [0.22%] 40 [3.4%] 18 [0.76%] 23.5 [1.1%] 1,029
HGQ DA 93.9% 1,045 [5.2𝜇s] 0 53 [4.5%] 20 [0.85%] 32.0 [1.5%] 1,029
HGQ DA 93.1% 1,045 [5.2𝜇s] 0 37 [3.1%] 15 [0.63%] 28.0 [1.3%] 1,029
HGQ DA 91.9% 1,045 [5.2𝜇s] 0 31 [2.6%] 14 [0.59%] 23.5 [1.1%] 1,029
9.3 Particle-based jet tagger
The particle-based jet tagger is a more challenging benchmark for low-latency neural networks on FPGAs [90]. Similar
to the high-level jet tagger, the task is to classify jets into five classes based on their originating particle. However,
instead of using the 16 high-level features, which are unlikely to be available in real-time, the raw particle information
is fed into the model. Up to 150 particles are available for each jet, ordered by their transverse momentum. Each particle
has 16 features, and up to 64 particles are used in the model (zero-padded if less than 64 particles are available). The
model architecture is an MLP-Mixer tailored for this task, and the detailed description can be found in [112]. The results
are reproduced following the same setup as in [112] with updated template functions and the latesthls4mlversion.
The results are shown in Table 8. The models shown on different rows are quantized to different bit-widths, regularized
by different 𝛽 values. The io_parallel configuration is used for all models, and only the DA strategy is used, as the
Latency strategy fails to converge in timing and to meet the initiation interval constraints. This is likely due to the
overly large, but highly sparse kernel matrices used in the MLP-Mixer architecture, where the HLS compiler’s heuristic
failed to implement the design properly.
Table 8. Accuracy, resource usage, and latency of the particle-based classifier models in HGQ. Reported resource usage after out
of context place-and-route with an AMD XCVU13P FPGA. The clock period used is 5 ns. All HGQ trained models are using the
MLP-Mixer architecture from [112]. Models without DA failed to meet timing and II constraints. All designs use no DSPs or BRAM
and have an II of one cycle.
Trainer Strategy Accuracy Latency (cc) LUT (k) FF (k)
HGQ DA 81.4% 13 [65 ns] 126 [7.3%] 26 [0.76%]
HGQ DA 81.0% 13 [65 ns] 68 [3.9%] 13 [0.38%]
HGQ DA 80.3% 12 [60 ns] 51 [3.0%] 11 [0.33%]
9.4 MNIST classification
Classification of images of handwritten digits from the Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology (MNIST)
database [37] is a common benchmark for computer vision tasks. The task is to classify handwritten digits from 0 to
9. The model architecture employed a single layer MLP with 128 hidden units and 10 output units. We trained three
models with different quantization levels with HGQ, all using the io_parallel approach for data transfer between
layers, and the results are shown in Table 9. Only the DA strategy can be applied to these models, as when using the
Latency strategy, the sparse768×128kernel matrix fails to unroll properly, leading to HLS synthesis failures.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
22 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
Table 9. Accuracy, resource usage, latency, and initiation intervals of the MNIST classifier models in HGQ [20]. Reported resource
usage after out of context place-and-route with an AMD XCVU13P FPGA. The clock period used is 5 ns. All HGQ trained models are
using a single layer MLP. Models without DA failed to synthesize. All designs use no DSPs or BRAM and have an II of one cycle.
Trainer Strategy Accuracy Latency (cc) LUT FF
HGQ DA 97.7% 2 [10 ns] 9671 [0.56%] 2,039 [0.06%]
HGQ DA 97.3% 2 [10 ns] 6890 [0.40%] 1,672 [0.05%]
HGQ DA 97.0% 2 [10 ns] 5040 [0.29%] 1,349 [0.04%]
9.5 Smart pixels
In [89, 135], we demonstrated the implementation of a neural network-based filter for low-momentum charged particle
tracks in “smart pixel” sensors, targeting on-chip data reduction to cope with the even higher data rates expected in
future HEP experiments. Using the Catapult back end, we translated a compact quantized classifier (~1,200 trainable
parameters) fromQKerasinto synthesizable C++ and generated fully combinatorial RTL code for integration in 28 nm
CMOS. The design was implemented in conjunction with the analog front end, using less than1 𝜇W / pixel for digital
logic within a total power budget below1W/cm2. The HLS-driven flow enabled faster design cycles, efficient exploration
of precision and parallelism, and ultimately achieved a bandwidth reduction between 54.4% and 75.4%.
Instead of transmitting full pixel cluster information, we further aim to compress the data into a small number of
variables that describe the kinematics of the traversing particle. Using a mixture density network implemented directly in
the pixel readout electronics, we can predict the track angle and hit position along with the associated uncertainties. This
additional layer of intelligent data reduction enables even lower bandwidth and downstream computational complexity
while preserving critical physics information. The most recent model is a five-layer quantized network, which inhls4ml
is implemented as a pipeline with an initiation interval of one, a latency of two clock cycles, using the io_parallel
and Latency strategies. The model consists of two convolutional layers followed by three dense layers (~3,000 trainable
parameters). The first convolutional layer is implemented as a depthwise-separable convolution to minimize the number
of parameters and reduce computation, which was added to the Catapult back end inhls4mlfor this project. Using 2D
convolutions, this model has an estimated area of 0.81 mm2 in 28 nm CMOS, while a 1D convolutional variant achieves
comparable functionality with a significantly reduced area of 0.39 mm2. Ongoing design space exploration is focused on
further minimizing area while preserving predictive performance and hardware feasibility.
9.6 Quality ofhls4mlresults
While the ease of use of HLS frameworks likehls4mlis a significant benefit, the quality of results is a critical factor for
adoption. Comparing the resource usage, latency, and throughput ofhls4mlgenerated designs against hand-mapped
Verilog designs for the same models, the HLS-synthesized designs can benefit from more sophisticated constant folding
in the HLS compiler compared with the FPGA vendor’s standard synthesis tools, the exploitation of carefully constructed
Verilog codes that better invoke the back end tools, and other optimizations [ 72, 73]. Thehls4mlflow can achieve
superior performance compared to hand-mapped designs in some cases, while being up to2 ×worse in the worst case.
Similar results are demonstrated in [104] for automated synthesis flows targeting embedded AI engines (AIEs). When
comparinghls4mldesigns automatically mapped to the FPGA fabric to software designs mapped automatically to
the VLIW processors embedded in some AMD Versal devices, thehls4mldesigns were generally superior to the AIE
implementations in resource usage, latency, and throughput, while being up to2×worse in the worst case.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 23
10 Applications ofhls4ml
hls4mlwas originally developed for HEP applications at CERN and has since been widely adopted for a variety of
use cases. The ATLAS and CMS detectors [32, 33] at the CERN LHC [45] deploy a data filtering system on FPGAs that
decides in real time which collisions to store persistently, reducing data volumes from approximately 100 TB/s to about
10 GB/s with a typical latency constraint of ∼10 𝜇s. As of now, three algorithms have been deployed usinghls4ml. The
first is an MLP to assign muon transverse momentum and displacement in triggers for unconventional signatures [59].
The AXOL1TL [26, 28] and CICADA [27, 29] algorithms are variational and convolutional autoencoders, respectively,
trained to detect anomalies [53] in the detector data with different levels of preprocessing. Similar applications with
hls4mlare being considered for other HEP experiments and related applications [50, 57, 79].
The need for real-time data analysis makes the deployment of ML models on FPGAs desirable in other scientific
environments as well. For example,hls4mlwas used to demonstrate that CNN models deployed on FPGAs could meet
latency requirements that would enable self-triggering of radio antennas for cosmic ray detection [40]. Similarly, the
necessity of real-time control of sensitive systems makes these techniques suitable for quantum computing applications,
wherehls4mlhas been used in the development of MLP models for the control [ 14] and read out [38] of qubits. As an
example of an application in accelerator control [109], a demonstrator system was designed usinghls4mlemploying
an Intel Arria 10 FPGA-based board to monitor and correctly attribute beam losses in the Fermilab Recycler Ring [105].
Similarly, for active feedback control in magnetic confinement fusion devices an inference latency of 7.7 𝜇s and end-to-
end latency of 17.6 𝜇s was achieved, enabling the tracking of magnetohydrodynamic modes in the plasma at over 100
kfps [133]. Potential applications also extend to radiation safety, where a compact, light-weight, low-power radiation
detector has been developed in which an MLP model is deployed on an Artix-7 Series FPGA usinghls4ml[82].
hls4mlhas also expanded out from scientific computing into diverse domains including automotive and space
applications. It has been used to prototype a quantized CNN for semantic segmentation in self-driving cars [ 48],
achieving a latency of ∼5ms while using less than 30% of the available resources on a Xilinx ZCU102 board. Power
efficiency constraints are a key concern for deploying ML models on satellites and other spacecraft.hls4mlis being
used in the development of models for environmental monitoring of the earth using satellites [108]. In another signal
processing application,hls4mlhas enabled the real-time analysis of microwave sensing data for food contamination
using an MLP [129], achieving a latency of27 𝜇s on an AMD/Xilinx Kria K26 FPGA.hls4mlwas used to deploy a
combined CNN and RNN model (C-RNN) for accurate classification of artificial surface textures with a latency of
6.21 𝜇s [116]. Demonstrating its usefulness in biomedical applications,hls4mlwas also used to prototype a 1D-CNN
for arrhythmia classification from ECG waves on a system-on-chip (SoC), with a power consumption of 1.655 W [80].
Another example is the classification of lymphocyte cells, wherehls4mlwas used to demonstrate a 12x reduction in
inference latency compared to GPUs when deploying the classifier on a Euresys frame grabber FPGA [ 68].hls4ml
was used to accelerate a ternary model for detecting malicious executables in network packets with a latency of 44 ns,
while maintaining the 100 Gbps network throughput [61]. In a speech recognition application, a 1D CNN model was
deployed usinghls4mlon a Pynq-Z2 FPGA, achieving a performance improvement of 6 ×to 12×compared to GPUs and
CPUs [36]. Given the growing community, use cases, and contributions, continued development and support ofhls4ml
as an open-source, high-performance and modular platform for neural network acceleration on FPGAs is imperative.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
24 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
11 Challenges and limitations
hls4ml’s place in the ecosystem as an interface between a growing set of training libraries for deep learning models
and HLS tools presents a variety of challenges for its continued development. The large number of front and back
ends already available or in active development will further increase the maintenance burden and requires increased
community engagement. The heterogeneous support of features in the different front and back ends outlined in Section 3
is therefore likely to persist, depending on the level of community interest in the different tools. This is exacerbated by
the fact that novel implementations derived usinghls4mlin the context of research projects are not always easy to
generalize and contribute back to the tool. This limits the usability ofhls4mlfor some tasks, especially if the user is
restricted to use one of the lesser developed back ends.
Problems can also arise from HLS tools, especially for larger models where the complexity might overwhelm the
HLS compiler, leading to long, or in extreme cases, failed HLS synthesis. Given the integration ofhls4mlwith a
large number of external tools and products, maintaining full functionality of the tool and high performance requires
extensive validation effort. Different HLS compiler versions frequently differ (e.g. supported pragmas may change), and
changes in performance for the same HLS code between versions are common. This requires regular adjustments and
reoptimization of the HLS templates inhls4ml. In extreme cases,hls4mlhas to react to the discontinuation of whole
tools, such as support for Altera FPGAs being dropped from the InteloneAPIcompiler starting with version 2025.1.
12 Related work
The acceleration of ML/AI inference on FPGAs is a rapidly evolving field, with numerous proprietary and open-source
solutions proposed. Broadly, FPGA neural network accelerators can be classified as (1) software-controllable, overlay-
based or (2) custom hardware generators [18, 91]. Overlay architectures implement a fixed microarchitecture in FPGA
fabric, which is controllable from software similar to CPUs and GPUs. Conversely, custom hardware accelerators
generate optimized model-specific designs, typically by creating dedicated hardware implementations for individual
layers or operators in the model. In this section, we provide a brief overview of the existing tools and their features,
focusing mainly on platforms with custom hardware generation, sincehls4mlfalls into this category. More in-depth
overviews of neural network acceleration on FPGAs, including overlay architectures, can be found in surveys [18, 91].
Table 10 summarizes the projects described in this section and their capabilities. Commercial platforms include
AMDVitis AI[ 9] and IntelFPGA AI Suite[ 67], both of which can convert neural network models from multiple deep
learning frameworks. The MERA [43] compiler from EdgeCortex converts models fromPyTorch,TensorFlow, and
ONNXinto dataflow graphs that can be deployed on their dynamic neural architecture IP cores. However, neither
framework extends to multiple hardware vendors nor supports arbitrary quantization.
On the research side, early platforms includeFP-DNN[ 54] andDeepBurning[ 132], which use RTL to generate hard-
ware designs, making them portable across platforms. HLS-based platforms includeDeepHLS[ 99] andPipeCNN[ 130]
that support MLP and CNN models. Neither of these four platforms support multiple front ends, and to our knowledge,
none are actively maintained.fpgaConvNet[ 124, 126, 127] focuses specifically on translating large-scale CNNs defined
inPyTorchorONNXinto HLS code forVivado HLS. Similarly,HPIPEprovides a workflow to create optimized CNN
designs starting fromTensorFlowmodels for various FPGAs using RTL design. Both frameworks include support
for arbitrary, per-layer quantization. To support even larger models,H2PIPE[ 56] extendsHPIPEwith designs that
utilize off-chip memory. For even larger models, such as transformers, two notable platforms areMASE[ 23, 136] and
cgra4ml[ 4].MASE[ 23, 136] supports quantization and conversion ofPyTorchmodels into FPGA designs using
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 25
Table 10. Comparison of different tools for the translation of ML models to FPGA designs.
Framework Multiple
ML frameworks
Multiple
hardware vendors
Arbitrary
QuantizationCNN RNN Transformers Open-source Maintained
Vitis AI [9]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Intel FPGA AI Suite [67]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
EdgeCortex MERA [43]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
FP-DNN [54]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓N/A
DeepBurning [132]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
DeepHLS [99]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
PipeCNN [130]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
DnnWeaver [103]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
NNGen [114]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
fpgaConvNet [125]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ +□o
HPIPE/H2PIPE [56, 110]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓N/A
MASE [23, 136]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
cgra4ml [4]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
chisel4ml [128]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
tinyHLS [62]✓ ✓ +□o +□o ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
FINN [15, 122]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
hls4ml[41]✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ +□o ✓ ✓
✓: Supported;+□o: Partially supported;✓: Not supported.
First group: commercial products; second group: research projects.
“Multiple ML frameworks” corresponds to a framework being able to ingest models from multiple different frameworks;
however, if a framework supportsONNX/QONNX, it automatically supports multiple frameworks, sinceKeras 2and
PyTorchcan be exported toONNX. “Arbitrary quantization” refers to the ability to accelerate arbitrarily quantized
models; rather than supporting only fixed quantization strategies (e.g.,INT8,FP16).
templates in SystemVerilog, making it portable across hardware platforms. Notably, it directly enables QAT, with a
strong focus on transformer models and LLMs. Similarly,cgra4ml[ 4] focuses on accelerating large neural networks by
reusing processing units across layers, including support for MLPs, CNNs, and transformers. Unlikehls4ml,cgra4ml
does not generate dataflow designs and stores weights in off-chip memory. NeitherMASEnorcgra4mlsupport multiple
front ends:MASEis compatible withPyTorchandcgra4mlwithQKeras.chisel4ml[ 128] enables the translation
of MLPs and CNNs fromQONNXinto fully parallelized, dataflow designs supporting arbitrary quantization via the
Chisel hardware description language. In general, performance comparable to that ofhls4mlwas reported [ 128]. On
the other hand,tinyHLS[ 62] generates Verilog code enabling MLPs and one-dimensional CNNs defined inKeras 2
to be deployed on FPGAs.FINN[ 15, 122] is an open-source project by AMD/Xilinx that allows translating models
defined inbrevitasorQONNXinto hardware designs targeting AMD/Xilinx FPGAs. Likehls4ml, it targets a dataflow
architecture with fine-grained quantization control for low-latency, high-throughput application, and supports a wide
range of neural network architectures.
13 Conclusions and outlook
FPGAs are uniquely suited for efficient and flexible deployment of neural networks in low-latency, low-power environ-
ments. However, traditional implementations of these models in RTL are complex and require specialized knowledge. A
large number of tools and platforms aim to aid users in the translation of their models into FPGA designs, removing the
need to re-implement common building blocks. Among these,hls4mlis an open-source platform that stands out for its
modular design and extensible nature.hls4mlsupports all major deep learning libraries and different HLS compilers,
enabling deployment across a wide range of FPGA vendors as well as ASIC design via integration withCatapult
Manuscript submitted to ACM
26 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
HLS. Furthermore,hls4mlsupports a wide and growing range of model architectures and provides a convenient
interface to include custom layers in the design. The FPGA designs available inhls4mlare easily customizable for
different objectives, such as latency or resource usage. Hardware-software co-design is crucial for achieving accurate
and high-performance designs, with pruning and QAT as the most common techniques.hls4mlsupports models
trained with most common QAT libraries and has integrated support for hardware-aware compression techniques.
Thus,hls4mlplays a central role in a growing ecosystem for optimized deployment of neural networks on FPGAs.
Additionally, it can act as a platform that supports research in novel model-hardware co-design techniques.
hls4mlis developed by an active, diverse community of researchers, continuously expanding its capabilities and
features. At its core, thehls4mlcommunity strives to keep the platform modular and extensible, continuously adding
new front and back ends. For example, a Flax/JAX front end and a SmartHLS compiler back end targeting Microchip
PolarFire FPGAs are in development. In parallel, to support NanoXplore radiation-tolerant FPGAs, the Catapult HLS
library will be extended, or alternatively, integration with the PandA Bambu HLS toolchain [47] will be added to the
back ends. Significant emphasis is being placed on supporting and developing novel co-design libraries to maximize
performance while minimizing resource and latency requirements. On the hardware design side, support for transformer
architectures are active area of development, with a first implementation being available via theHGQ2 framework.
A variation of the transformer architecture optimized for computational efficiency on point cloud data using locality
sensitive hashing (HEPT) [81] is also being developed inhls4ml. Another promising direction for future development
is the integration of AMD AI engines, andhls4mlmay take advantage of this architecture alongside its existing
support for FPGA designs. Followinghls4ml’s recent integration with Coyote [ 76, 97], an open-source shell with
rich networking services and collective communication [60], future work may extendhls4mlto support distributed
inference, by leveraging these services. Such distributed inference would be particularly suitable for larger models that
cannot fit on a single FPGA, e.g., transformers.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the importance of the Fast Machine Learning community for the development of this project. We
especially thank Paolo D’Alberto, Duen-Jeng (DJ) Wang and Luciano Lavagno from AMD, as well as Yaman Umuroglu,
Michaela Blott, and the overall FINN team, for helpful insights and facilitating technical discussions. This work was
partly supported by the Accelerated AI Algorithms for Data-Driven Discovery (A3D3) Institute under U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) Grant No. PHY-2117997. This work was supported by FermiForward Discovery Group,
LLC under Contract No. 89243024CSC000002 with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Office
of High Energy Physics. Work done by Imperial College is funded by the Science and Technology Facilities Council
(STFC) grant ST/W000636/1 and EPSRC (grant numbers UKRI256, EP/V028251/1, EP/N031768/1, EP/S030069/1, and
EP/X036006/1). Enrico Lupi, Dimitrios Danopoulos, and Vladimir Lončar are funded by the Eric & Wendy Schmidt
Fund for Strategic Innovation through the CERN Next Generation Triggers project under grant agreement number
SIF-2023-004. Nicolò Ghielmetti is supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 101135358). This work was partially supported
by DOE ASRSP GCFA Grant ID: SP0062070 and NSF POSE Phase II Award 2303700. Dylan Rankin is supported by the
DOE, Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics Early Career Research program under Award No. DE-SC0025324.
Javier Duarte is additionally supported by the Research Corporation for Science Advancement (RCSA) under grant
#CS-CSA-2023-109, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation under grant #FG-2023-20452, and DOE, Office of Science, Office of High
Energy Physics Early Career Research program under Award No. DE-SC0021187. Santosh Parajuli and Mark Neubauer
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 27
are additionally supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics, under
contract number DE-SC0023365. Chang Sun is partially supported by the NSF ACCESS Grant number PHY240298, DOE,
Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics grant under Award No. DE-SC0011925. Jennifer Ngadiuba and Chang
Sun are partially supported by the DOE Office of Science, Office of High Energy Physics “Designing efficient edge AI
with physics phenomena” Project (DE-FOA-0002705). Thea K. Aarrestad is supported by the Swiss National Science
Foundation Grant No. PZ00P2_201594. Ryan Forelli gratefully acknowledges support from the Ryan Fellowship and the
International Institute for Nanotechnology at Northwestern University. Benjamin Ramhorst gratefully acknowledges
AMD for the donation of the Heterogeneous Accelerated Compute Cluster (HACC) at ETH Zurich, which was partially
used for the development and testing of the work presented in this paper.
References
[1] Georges Aad et al. 2021. Artificial Neural Networks on FPGAs for Real-Time Energy Reconstruction of the ATLAS LAr Calorimeters.Comput.
Softw. Big Sci.5 (2021), 19. doi:10.1007/s41781-021-00066-y
[2] Thea Aarrestad et al. 2021. Fast convolutional neural networks on FPGAs with hls4ml.Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.2 (2021), 045015. doi:10.1088/2632-
2153/ac0ea1 arXiv:2101.05108 [cs.LG]
[3] Martín Abadi et al. 2015. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems. https://www.tensorflow.org/ Software available
from tensorflow.org.
[4] G Abarajithan, Zhenghua Ma, Zepeng Li, Shrideep Koparkar, Ravidu Munasinghe, Francesco Restuccia, and Ryan Kastner. 2024. CGRA4ML: A
Framework to Implement Modern Neural Networks for Scientific Edge Computing. (2024). arXiv:2408.15561 [cs.AR]
[5] AMD. 2024.Developing Vitis Kernels and Applications. Retrieved May 30, 2025 from https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/ug1700-vitis-accelerated-data-
center/Developing-Vitis-Kernels-and-Applications
[6] AMD. 2024.Vitis High-Level Synthesis User Guide (UG1399). Retrieved May 1, 2025 from https://docs.amd.com/r/en-US/ug1399-vitis-hls/Introduction
[7] AMD. 2025.ABB Robotics Powers Collaborative Robots with AMD. Retrieved May 6, 2025 from https://www.amd.com/en/resources/case-studies/abb-
robotics.html
[8] AMD. 2025.Smart Camera. Retrieved May 6, 2025 from https://xilinx.github.io/kria-apps-docs/kv260/2022.1/build/html/docs/smartcamera/
smartcamera_landing.html
[9] AMD/Xilinx. 2024. Vitis AI Development Platform. https://www.xilinx.com/products/design-tools/vitis/vitis-ai.html. Accessed April 23, 2025.
[10] Marta Andronic, Jiawen Li, and George A. Constantinides. 2025. PolyLUT: Ultra-low Latency Polynomial Inference with Hardware-Aware
Structured Pruning. arXiv:2501.08043 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.08043
[11] Jason Ansel et al. 2024. PyTorch 2: Faster Machine Learning Through Dynamic Python Bytecode Transformation and Graph Compilation. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2(La
Jolla, CA, USA)(ASPLOS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 929. doi:10.1145/3620665.3640366
[12] Manish Arora, Shawn Bohrer, Omer Yoachimik, Cody Doucette, Alex Forster, and Nick Wood. 2024.How Cloudflare auto-mitigated world record 3.8
Tbps DDoS attack. Retrieved May 6, 2025 from https://blog.cloudflare.com/how-cloudflare-auto-mitigated-world-record-3-8-tbps-ddos-attack/
[13] Junjie Bai, Fang Lu, Ke Zhang, et al. 2019. ONNX: Open Neural Network Exchange. https://github.com/onnx/onnx.
[14] Madhav Narayan Bhat, Marco Russo, Luca P. Carloni, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Farah Fahim, Andy C. Y. Li, and Gabriel N. Perdue. 2025. Machine
learning for arbitrary single-qubit rotations on an embedded device.Quantum Machine Intelligence7, 1 (2025), 8. doi:10.1007/s42484-024-00214-8
arXiv:2411.13037 [quant-ph]
[15] Michaela Blott, Thomas B Preußer, Nicholas J Fraser, Giulio Gambardella, Kenneth O’brien, Yaman Umuroglu, Miriam Leeser, and Kees Vissers.
2018. FINN-R: An end-to-end deep-learning framework for fast exploration of quantized neural networks.ACM Trans. Reconfigurable Technol. Syst.
11 (2018), 1.
[16] ANDREW D. BOOTH. 1951. A SIGNED BINARY MULTIPLICATION TECHNIQUE.The Quarterly Journal of Mechanics and Applied Mathematics4,
2 (01 1951), 236–240. doi:10.1093/qjmam/4.2.236 arXiv:https://academic.oup.com/qjmam/article-pdf/4/2/236/5301697/4-2-236.pdf
[17] Hendrik Borras, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Javier Duarte, Nicolò Ghielmetti, Ben Hawks, Scott Hauck, Shih-Chieh Hsu, Ryan Kastner, Jason Liang,
Andres Meza, Jules Muhizi, Tai Nguyen, Rushil Roy, Nhan Tran, Yaman Umuroglu, Olivia Weng, Aidan Yokuda, and Michaela Blott. 2022. Open-
source FPGA-ML codesign for the MLPerf Tiny Benchmark. In3rd Workshop on Benchmarking Machine Learning Workloads on Emerging Hardware
(MLBench) at 5th Conference on Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys). arXiv:2206.11791 [cs.LG]
[18] Andrew Boutros, Aman Arora, and Vaughn Betz. 2024. Field-Programmable Gate Array Architecture for Deep Learning: Survey & Future Directions.
(2024). arXiv:2404.10076 [cs.AR]
[19] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. 2020. Once for All: Train One Network and Specialize it for Efficient
Deployment. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations. arXiv:1908.09791 https://openreview.net/forum?id=HylxE1HKwS
Manuscript submitted to ACM
28 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
[20] Sun Chang, Thea Årrestad, Vladimir Lončar, Jennifer Ngadiuba, and Maria Spiropulu. 2024. Gradient-based Automatic Per-Weight Mixed Precision
Quantization for Neural Networks On-Chip. (2024). doi:10.7907/HQ8JD-RHG30 arXiv:2405.00645 [cs.LG]
[21] Kumar Chellapilla, Sidd Puri, and Patrice Simard. 2006. High Performance Convolutional Neural Networks for Document Processing. In
Tenth International Workshop on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, Guy Lorette (Ed.). Université de Rennes 1, Suvisoft, La Baule (France).
https://inria.hal.science/inria-00112631 http://www.suvisoft.com.
[22] Hongrong Cheng, Miao Zhang, and Javen Qinfeng Shi. 2024. A Survey on Deep Neural Network Pruning: Taxonomy, Comparison, Analysis, and
Recommendations.IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.46, 12 (Dec. 2024), 10558–10578. doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3447085
[23] Jianyi Cheng, Cheng Zhang, Zhewen Yu, Christos-Savvas Bouganis, George A. Constantinides, and Yiren Zhao. 2024. A Dataflow Compiler for
Efficient LLM Inference using Custom Microscaling Formats. arXiv:2307.15517 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15517
[24] François Chollet et al. 2015. Keras. https://keras.io.
[25] Eric S. Chung et al. 2018. Serving DNNs in Real Time at Datacenter Scale with Project Brainwave.IEEE Micro38, 2 (2018), 8–20. doi:10.1109/MM.
2018.022071131
[26] CMS Collaboration. 2023.Anomaly Detection in the CMS Global Trigger Test Crate for Run 3. CMS Detector Performance Summary CMS-DP-2023-079.
https://cds.cern.ch/record/2876546
[27] CMS Collaboration. 2023.Level-1 Trigger Calorimeter Image Convolutional Anomaly Detection Algorithm. CMS Detector Performance Summary
CMS-DP-2023-086. https://cds.cern.ch/record/2879816
[28] CMS Collaboration. 2024.2024 Data Collected with AXOL1TL Anomaly Detection at the CMS Level-1 Trigger. CMS Detector Performance Summary
CMS-DP-2024-059. https://cds.cern.ch/record/2904695
[29] CMS Collaboration. 2024.Model-Independent Real-Time Anomaly Detection at the CMS Level-1 Calorimeter Trigger with CICADA. CMS Detector
Performance Summary CMS-DP-2024-121. https://cds.cern.ch/record/2917884
[30] Claudionor N. Coelho, Aki Kuusela, Shan Li, Hao Zhuang, Thea Aarrestad, Vladimir Loncar, Jennifer Ngadiuba, Maurizio Pierini, Adrian Alan
Pol, and Sioni Summers. 2021. Automatic heterogeneous quantization of deep neural networks for low-latency inference on the edge for particle
detectors.Nature Mach. Intell.3 (2021), 675. doi:10.1038/s42256-021-00356-5 arXiv:2006.10159 [physics.ins-det]
[31] Claudionor N. Coelho, Aki Kuusela, Shan Li, Hao Zhuang, Jennifer Ngadiuba, Thea Klaeboe Aarrestad, Vladimir Loncar, Maurizio Pierini,
Adrian Alan Pol, and Sioni Summers. 2021. Automatic heterogeneous quantization of deep neural networks for low-latency inference on the edge
for particle detectors.Nature Mach. Intell.8 (2021), 675. doi:10.1038/s42256-021-00356-5 arXiv:2006.10159 [physics.ins-det]
[32] ATLAS Collaboration. 2008. The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider.JINST3 (2008), S08003. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08003
[33] CMS Collaboration. 2008. The CMS experiment at the CERN LHC.JINST3 (2008), S08004. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08004
[34] Miles Cranmer. 2023. Interpretable Machine Learning for Science with PySR and SymbolicRegression.jl. (2023). arXiv:2305.01582 [astro-ph.IM]
[35] Allison McCarn Deiana et al . 2022. Applications and Techniques for Fast Machine Learning in Science.Front. Big Data5 (2022), 787421.
doi:10.3389/fdata.2022.787421 arXiv:2110.13041 [cs.LG]
[36] Trysten Dembeck and Chirag Parikh. 2025. Development and Optimization of an Ultra-lightweight Deep Spoken Keyword Spotting Model for
FPGA Acceleration. InComputer Applications in Industry and Engineering, Gongzhu Hu, Krishna K. Kambhampaty, and Indranil Roy (Eds.). Springer
Nature Switzerland, Cham, 3.
[37] Li Deng. 2012. The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research.IEEE Signal Processing Magazine29, 6 (2012), 141.
[38] Giuseppe Di Guglielmo et al . 2025. End-to-end workflow for machine learning-based qubit readout with QICK and hls4ml. (1 2025).
arXiv:2501.14663 [quant-ph]
[39] Jennet Dickinson et al . 2023. Smartpixels: Towards on-sensor inference of charged particle track parameters and uncertainties. (12 2023).
arXiv:2312.11676 [hep-ex]
[40] Qader Dorosti. 2025. AI-Enhanced Self-Triggering for Extensive Air Showers: Performance and FPGA Feasibility. (2 2025). arXiv:2502.21198 [astro-
ph.IM]
[41] Javier Duarte et al. 2018. Fast inference of deep neural networks in FPGAs for particle physics.JINST13, 07 (2018), P07027. doi:10.1088/1748-
0221/13/07/P07027 arXiv:1804.06913 [physics.ins-det]
[42] Noemi D’Abbondanza, Stylianos Tzelepis, Nicolò Ghielmetti, Ioannis Kakogeorgiou, Vanya Buchova, Konstantinos Karantzalos, Katerina Kikaki,
Nicolas-Marcel Lemoine, Maurizio Pierini, Sioni Summers, et al . 2025. Edge SpAIce: Deep Learning Deployment Pipeline for Onboard Data
Reduction on Satellite FPGAs. In2025 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW). IEEE, 1243–1249.
[43] EdgeCortix Inc. 2025. MERA Compiler and Software Framework. https://www.edgecortix.com/en/products/mera. Accessed April 23, 2025.
[44] Abdelrahman Elabd et al. 2022. Graph Neural Networks for Charged Particle Tracking on FPGAs.Front. Big Data5 (2022), 828666. doi:10.3389/
fdata.2022.828666 arXiv:2112.02048 [physics.ins-det]
[45] Lyndon Evans and Philip Bryant. 2008. LHC Machine.JINST3, 08 (aug 2008), S08001. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08001
[46] FastML Team. 2025.fastmachinelearning/hls4ml. doi:10.5281/zenodo.1201549
[47] Fabrizio Ferrandi, Vito Giovanni Castellana, Serena Curzel, Pietro Fezzardi, Michele Fiorito, Marco Lattuada, Marco Minutoli, Christian Pilato, and
Antonino Tumeo. 2021. Invited: Bambu: an Open-Source Research Framework for the High-Level Synthesis of Complex Applications. In2021 58th
ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC). IEEE, 1327–1330. doi:10.1109/DAC18074.2021.9586110
[48] Nicolò Ghielmetti et al. 2022. Real-time semantic segmentation on FPGAs for autonomous vehicles with hls4ml.Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.3 (2022),
045011. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/ac9cb5 arXiv:2205.07690 [cs.CV]
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 29
[49] Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2022. A survey of quantization methods for efficient
neural network inference. InLow-power computer vision. Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, USA, 291–326.
[50] Fotis I. Giasemis, Vladimir Lončar, Bertrand Granado, and Vladimir Vava Gligorov. 2025. Comparative Analysis of FPGA and GPU Performance for
Machine Learning-Based Track Reconstruction at LHCb. (2 2025). arXiv:2502.02304 [hep-ex]
[51] Davide Giri, Kuan-Lin Chiu, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Paolo Mantovani, and Luca P Carloni. 2020. ESP4ML: Platform-based design of systems-on-chip
for embedded machine learning. In2020 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE). IEEE, 1049–1054.
[52] Google. 2025.Large Language Models (LLMs) with Google AI | Google Cloud. Retrieved May 1, 2025 from https://cloud.google.com/ai/llms
[53] Ekaterina Govorkova et al. 2022. Autoencoders on field-programmable gate arrays for real-time, unsupervised new physics detection at 40 MHz at
the Large Hadron Collider.Nature Mach. Intell.4 (2022), 154. doi:10.1038/s42256-022-00441-3 arXiv:2108.03986 [physics.ins-det]
[54] Yijin Guan, Hao Liang, Ningyi Xu, Wenqiang Wang, Shaoshuai Shi, Xi Chen, Guangyu Sun, Wei Zhang, and Jason Cong. 2017. FP-DNN:
An Automated Framework for Mapping Deep Neural Networks onto FPGAs with RTL-HLS Hybrid Templates . In2017 IEEE 25th Annual
International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 152–159.
doi:10.1109/FCCM.2017.25
[55] Yuchen Gui, Qizhe Wu, Wei Yuan, Huawen Liang, Xiaotian Wang, and Xi Jin. 2024. A FPGA-HBM-Based Hardware Streaming Accelerator for
GNN Sampling. In2024 IEEE 35th International Conference on Application-specific Systems, Architectures and Processors (ASAP). IEEE, Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, 77–78. doi:10.1109/ASAP61560.2024.00026
[56] Mathew Hall and Vaughn Betz. 2020. HPIPE: Heterogeneous Layer-Pipelined and Sparse-Aware CNN Inference for FPGAs. InProceedings of
the 2020 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays(Seaside, CA, USA)(FPGA ’20). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 320. doi:10.1145/3373087.3375380
[57] Yidi Hao, Changqing Feng, Zixuan Zhou, Wenhao Dong, Zhujun Fang, Xueye Hu, Hang Zhou, and Shubin Liu. 2025. A 3-D Track Reconstruction
Algorithm for Preresearch of the STCF MDC L1 Trigger.IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.72, 3 (2025), 429. doi:10.1109/TNS.2024.3503068
[58] Ben Hawks, Dennis Plotnikov, Karla Tame-Narvaez, Hamza Ezzaoui Rahali, Mohammad Mehdi Rahimifar, Audrey C. Therrien, Giuseppe
Di Guglielmo, Nhan Tran, Javier Duarte, and Vladimir Loncar. 2025. wa-hls4ml and lui-gnn: A benchmark and GNN-based surrogate model for
hls4ml resource and latency estimation. Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory (FNAL), Batavia, IL (United States). doi:10.2172/2549315
[59] Aram Hayrapetyan et al . 2024. Development of the CMS detector for the CERN LHC Run 3.JINST19, 05 (2024), P05064. doi:10.1088/1748-
0221/19/05/P05064 arXiv:2309.05466 [physics.ins-det]
[60] Zhenhao He, Dario Korolija, Yu Zhu, Benjamin Ramhorst, Tristan Laan, Lucian Petrica, Michaela Blott, and Gustavo Alonso. 2024. {ACCL+}: an
{FPGA-Based}Collective Engine for Distributed Applications. In18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
24). 211–231.
[61] Maximilian Jakob Heer, Benjamin Ramhorst, and Gustavo Alonso. 2025. Machine Learning-based Deep Packet Inspection at Line Rate for RDMA
on FPGAs. InProceedings of the 5th Workshop on Machine Learning and Systems(World Trade Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands)(EuroMLSys ’25).
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 148–155. doi:10.1145/3721146.3721935
[62] Ingo Hoyer, Alexander Utz, Christoph Hoog Antink, and Karsten Seidl. 2025. tinyHLS: a novel open source high level synthesis tool targeting
hardware accelerators for artificial neural network inference.Physiological Measurement46, 1 (2025), 015002. doi:10.1088/1361-6579/ada8f0
[63] Yunxiang Hu, Yuhao Liu, and Zhuoyuan Liu. 2022. A Survey on Convolutional Neural Network Accelerators: GPU, FPGA and ASIC. In2022 14th
International Conference on Computer Research and Development (ICCRD). IEEE, Shenzhen, China, 100–107. doi:10.1109/ICCRD54409.2022.9730377
[64] Changho Hwang, Wei Cui, Yifan Xiong, Ziyue Yang, Ze Liu, Han Hu, Zilong Wang, Rafael Salas, Jithin Jose, Prabhat Ram, et al . 2023. Tutel:
Adaptive mixture-of-experts at scale.Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems5 (2023), 269–287.
[65] Yutaro Iiyama et al. 2020. Distance-Weighted Graph Neural Networks on FPGAs for Real-Time Particle Reconstruction in High Energy Physics.
Front. Big Data3 (2020), 598927. doi:10.3389/fdata.2020.598927 arXiv:2008.03601 [physics.ins-det]
[66] Intel. 2025.oneAPI: A New Era of Heterogeneous Computing. Retrieved May 1, 2025 from https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/
tools/oneapi/overview.html#gs.lz9vhk
[67] Intel Corporation. 2024. Intel FPGA AI Suite. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/software-kit/851795/intel-fpga-ai-suite.html. Accessed
June 2, 2025.
[68] Khayrul Islam, Ryan F. Forelli, Jianzhong Han, Deven Bhadane, Jian Huang, Joshua C. Agar, Nhan Tran, Seda Ogrenci, and Yaling Liu. 2025.
Real-Time Cell Sorting with Scalable In Situ FPGA-Accelerated Deep Learning. arXiv:2503.12622 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.12622
[69] Abhishek Kumar Jain, Sharan Kumar, Aashish Tripathi, and Dinesh Gaitonde. 2021. Sparse Deep Neural Network Acceleration on HBM-Enabled
FPGA Platform. In2021 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC). IEEE, Waltham, MA, USA, 1–7. doi:10.1109/HPEC49654.
2021.9622804
[70] Zhixing Jiang, Dennis Yin, Yihui Chen, Elham E. Khoda, Scott Hauck, Shih-Chieh Hsu, Ekaterina Govorkova, Philip Harris, Vladimir Loncar,
and Eric A. Moreno. 2025. Low latency transformer inference on FPGAs for physics applications with hls4ml.JINST20 (2025), P04014.
doi:10.1088/1748-0221/20/04/P04014 arXiv:2409.05207 [cs.LG]
[71] Zhixing Jiang, Dennis Yin, Elham E. Khoda, Vladimir Loncar, Ekaterina Govorkova, Eric Moreno, Philip Harris, Scott Hauck, and Shih-Chieh
Hsu. 2023. Ultra Fast Transformers on FPGAs for Particle Physics Experiments. InMachine Learning and the Physical Sciences Workshop, NeurIPS.
arXiv:2402.01047 [cs.LG] https://ml4physicalsciences.github.io/2023/files/NeurIPS_ML4PS_2023_241.pdf
Manuscript submitted to ACM
30 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
[72] Caroline Johnson. 2023.Evaluating the Quality of HLS4ML’s Basic Neural Network Implementations on FPGAs. Master’s thesis. University of
Washington, Dept. of ECE.
[73] Caroline Johnson, Scott Hauck, Shih-Chieh Hsu, Waiz Khan, Matthew Bavier, Oleh Kondratyuk, Trinh Nguyen, Stephany Ayala-Cerna, Aidan
Short, Jan Silva, Anatoliy Martynyuk, and Geoff Jones. 2023. Quantifying the Efficiency of High-Level Synthesis for Machine Learning Inference.
InFast ML for Science Workshop at ICCAD.
[74] Matthew Kaufman. 2024.NASA Trains Machine Learning Algorithm for Mars Sample Analysis. Retrieved May 6, 2025 from https://www.nasa.gov/
technology/nasa-trains-machine-learning-algorithm-for-mars-sample-analysis/
[75] Elham E. Khoda et al. 2023. Ultra-low latency recurrent neural network inference on FPGAs for physics applications with hls4ml.Mach. Learn. Sci.
Tech.4, 2 (2023), 025004. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/acc0d7 arXiv:2207.00559 [cs.LG]
[76] Dario Korolija, Timothy Roscoe, and Gustavo Alonso. 2020. Do OS abstractions make sense on FPGAs?. InProceedings of the 14th USENIX Conference
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’20). USENIX Association, USA, Article 56, 20 pages.
[77] Yihang Lu, Xingyun Qi, Yuan Li, Mingche Lai, Yankang Zhao, Zhenqi Li, Hanyuan Li, and Qiang Wang. 2024. Automatic Implementation of
Large-Scale CNNs on FPGA Cluster Based on HLS4ML. In2024 IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing with Applications
(ISPA). IEEE, 1080–1087.
[78] Paolo Mantovani, Davide Giri, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Luca Piccolboni, Joseph Zuckerman, Emilio G Cota, Michele Petracca, Christian Pilato, and
Luca P Carloni. 2020. Agile SoC development with open ESP. InProceedings of the 39th International Conference on Computer-Aided Design. 1–9.
[79] Mohammad Mehdi Rahimifar, Quentin Wingering, Berthié Gouin-Ferland, Ryan Coffee, and Audrey C. Therrien. 2024. Accelerating data acquisition
with FPGA-based edge machine learning: a case study with LCLS-II.Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.5, 4 (2024), 045041. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/ad8ea8
[80] Feroz Ahmed Mian and Saima Zafar. 2024. SoC-Based Implementation of 1-D Convolutional Neural Network for 3-Channel ECG Arrhythmia
Classification via HLS4ML.IEEE Embedded Systems Letters16, 4 (2024), 429–432. doi:10.1109/LES.2024.3354081
[81] Siqi Miao, Zhiyuan Lu, Mia Liu, Javier Duarte, and Pan Li. 2024. Locality-Sensitive Hashing-Based Efficient Point Transformer with Applications in
High-Energy Physics. In41st International Conference on Machine Learning, Vol. 235. 35546. arXiv:2402.12535 [cs.LG] https://proceedings.mlr.
press/v235/miao24b.html
[82] Iván René Morales, Romina Soledad Molina, Mladen Bogovac, Nikola Jovalekic, Maria Liz Crespo, Kalliopi Kanaki, Giovanni Ramponi, and Sergio
Carrato. 2024. Gamma/Neutron Online Discrimination Based on Machine Learning With CLYC Detectors.IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci.71, 12 (2024), 2602.
doi:10.1109/tns.2024.3498321
[83] Anouar Nechi, Lukas Groth, Saleh Mulhem, Farhad Merchant, Rainer Buchty, and Mladen Berekovic. 2023. Fpga-based deep learning inference
accelerators: Where are we standing?ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable Technology and Systems16, 4 (2023), 1–32.
[84] Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y. Ng. 2011. Reading Digits in Natural Images with Unsupervised
Feature Learning.
[85] Jennifer Ngadiuba, Vladimir Loncar, Maurizio Pierini, Sioni Summers, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Javier Duarte, Philip Harris, Dylan Rankin,
Sergo Jindariani, Mia Liu, Kevin Pedro, Nhan Tran, Edward Kreinar, Sheila Sagear, Zhenbin Wu, and Duc Hoang. 2020. Compressing deep
neural networks on FPGAs to binary and ternary precision with hls4ml.Machine Learning: Science and Technology2, 1 (dec 2020), 015001.
doi:10.1088/2632-2153/aba042
[86] Patrick Odagiu et al. 2024. Ultrafast jet classification at the HL-LHC.Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.5 (2024), 035017. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/ad5f10
arXiv:2402.01876 [hep-ex]
[87] Alessandro Pappalardo. 2023.Xilinx/brevitas. doi:10.5281/zenodo.3333552
[88] Alessandro Pappalardo, Yaman Umuroglu, Michaela Blott, Jovan Mitrevski, Ben Hawks, Nhan Tran, Vladimir Loncar, Sioni Summers, Hendrik
Borras, Jules Muhizi, Matthew Trahms, Shih-Chieh Hsu Hsu, Scott Hauck, and Javier Duarte. 2022. QONNX: Representing Arbitrary-Precision
Quantized Neural Networks. In4th Workshop on Accelerated Machine Learning (AccML) at HiPEAC 2022 Conference. arXiv:2206.07527 [cs.LG]
https://accml.dcs.gla.ac.uk/papers/2022/4thAccML_paper_1(12).pdf
[89] Benjamin Parpillon, Chinar Syal, Jieun Yoo, Jennet Dickinson, Morris Swartz, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Alice Bean, Douglas Berry, Manuel Blanco
Valentin, Karri DiPetrillo, Anthony Badea, Lindsey Gray, Petar Maksimovic, Corrinne Mills, Mark S. Neubauer, Gauri Pradhan, Nhan Tran, Dahai
Wen, and Farah Fahim. 2024. Smart Pixels: In-pixel AI for on-sensor data filtering. arXiv:2406.14860 [physics.ins-det] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14860
[90] Maurizio Pierini, Javier Mauricio Duarte, Nhan Tran, and Marat Freytsis. 2020. HLS4ML LHC Jet dataset (150 particles). doi:10.5281/zenodo.3602260
[91] Patrick Plagwitz, Frank Hannig, Martin Ströbel, Christoph Strohmeyer, and Jürgen Teich. 2021. A Safari through FPGA-based Neural Network
Compilation and Design Automation Flows. In2021 IEEE 29th Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines
(FCCM). 10–19. doi:10.1109/FCCM51124.2021.00010
[92] Zhiqiang Que et al. 2023. MetaML: Automating customizable cross-stage design-flow for deep learning acceleration. In2023 33rd International
Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL). IEEE, 248–252.
[93] Zhiqiang Que et al. 2025. MetaML-Pro: Cross-Stage Design Flow Automation for Efficient Deep Learning Acceleration.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05850
(2025).
[94] Zhiqiang Que et al . 2025. Trustworthy Deep Learning Acceleration with Customizable Design Flow Automation. InProceedings of the 15th
International Symposium on Highly Efficient Accelerators and Reconfigurable Technologies. 1–13.
[95] Zhiqiang Que, Chang Sun, Sudarshan Paramesvaran, Emyr Clement, Katerina Karakoulaki, Christopher Brown, Lauri Laatu, Arianna Cox,
Alexander Tapper, Wayne Luk, and Maria Spiropulu. 2025. JEDI-linear: Fast and Efficient Graph Neural Networks for Jet Tagging on FPGAs. In
Manuscript submitted to ACM
hls4ml: A Flexible, Open-Source Platform for Deep Learning Acceleration on Reconfigurable Hardware 31
2025 International Conference on Field-Programmable Technology (FPT). IEEE.
[96] Mohammad Mehdi Rahimifar, Hamza Ezzaoui Rahali, and Audrey C. Therrien. 2024. rule4ml: An Open-Source Tool for Resource Utilization and
Latency Estimation for ML Models on FPGA. arXiv:2408.05314 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.05314
[97] Benjamin Ramhorst, Dario Korolija, Maximilian Jakob Heer, Jonas Dann, Luhao Liu, and Gustavo Alonso. 2025. Coyote v2: Raising the Level of
Abstraction for Data Center FPGAs(SOSP ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 639–654. doi:10.1145/3731569.3764845
[98] Benjamin Ramhorst, Vladimir Lončar, and George A. Constantinides. 2023. FPGA Resource-aware Structured Pruning for Real-Time Neural
Networks. In2023 International Conference on Field Programmable Technology (ICFPT). IEEE, Yokohama, Japan, 282. doi:10.1109/icfpt59805.2023.00046
[99] Mohammad Riazati, Masoud Daneshtalab, Mikael Sjödin, and Björn Lisper. 2020. DeepHLS: A complete toolchain for automatic synthesis of
deep neural networks to FPGA. In2020 27th IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS). IEEE, Glasgow, UK, 1–4.
doi:10.1109/ICECS49266.2020.9294881
[100] Amazon Web Services. 2021.Seafloor Systems Saves 4 Hours of Labor per Robot Build Using AWS IoT Greengrass. Retrieved May 6, 2025 from
https://aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/seafloor/
[101] Amazon Web Services. 2024.Siemens Electronics Factory Erlangen Reduces Machine Learning Deployment Time by 80% with A WS and Siemens Industrial
AI on Industrial Edge. Retrieved May 6, 2025 from https://aws.amazon.com/partners/success/siemens-electronics-factory-erlangen-siemens/
[102] Amazon Web Services. 2025.Transform your business with generative AI. Retrieved May 1, 2025 from https://aws.amazon.com/ai/generative-ai/
[103] Hardik Sharma, Jongse Park, Divya Mahajan, Emmanuel Amaro, Joon Kyung Kim, Chenkai Shao, Asit Mishra, and Hadi Esmaeilzadeh. 2016. From
high-level deep neural models to FPGAs. InThe 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO-49). IEEE Press,
Taipei, Taiwan, Article 17, 12 pages.
[104] Yilin Shen. 2024.Evaluating the Efficiency of Neural Network Implementations on AMD Versal AI Engines. Master’s thesis. University of Washington,
Dept. of ECE.
[105] R. Shi, S. Ogrenci, J. M. Arnold, J. R. Berlioz, P. Hanlet, K. J. Hazelwood, M. A. Ibrahim, H. Liu, V. P. Nagaslaev, A. Narayanan 1, D. J. Nicklaus, J.
Mitrevski, G. Pradhan, A. L. Saewert, B. A. Schupbach, K. Seiya, M. Thieme, R. M. Thurman-Keup, and N. V. Tran. 2023. ML-based Real-Time
Control at the Edge: An Approach Using hls4ml. arXiv:2311.05716 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.05716
[106] Siemens Software. 2025. Catapult High-Level Synthesis and Verification. https://eda.sw.siemens.com/en-US/ic/catapult-high-level-synthesis/.
Accessed May 30, 2025.
[107] Jon Slominski and Brad Bonn. 2021.How Boston Dynamics and AWS use mobility and computer vision for dynamic sensing. Retrieved May 6, 2025
from https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/robotics/how-boston-dynamics-and-aws-use-mobility-and-computer-vision-for-dynamic-sensing/
[108] Edge SpAIce. 2024.Novel Edge-AI system for accurate and near real-time plastic detection and monitoring in marine environment. Retrieved May 1,
2025 from https://edgespaice.eu/
[109] Jason St. John et al. 2021. Real-time artificial intelligence for accelerator control: A study at the Fermilab Booster.Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams24 (2021),
104601. doi:10.1103/PhysRevAccelBeams.24.104601 arXiv:2011.07371 [physics.acc-ph]
[110] Marius Stan, Mathew Hall, Mohamed Ibrahim, and Vaughn Betz. 2022. HPIPE NX: Boosting CNN Inference Acceleration Performance with
AI-Optimized FPGAs. In2022 International Conference on Field-Programmable Technology (ICFPT). IEEE, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 1–9. doi:10.1109/
ICFPT56656.2022.9974441
[111] Chang Sun, Takumi Nakajima, Yuki Mitsumori, Yasuyuki Horii, and Makoto Tomoto. 2023. Fast muon tracking with machine learning implemented
in FPGA.Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A1045 (2023), 167546. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2022.167546 arXiv:2202.04976 [physics.ins-det]
[112] Chang Sun, Jennifer Ngadiuba, Maurizio Pierini, and Maria Spiropulu. 2025. Fast Jet Tagging with MLP-Mixers on FPGAs. (2025).
arXiv:2503.03103 [physics.ins-det]
[113] Chang Sun, Zhiqiang Que, Vladimir Loncar, Wayne Luk, and Maria Spiropulu. [n. d.]. da4ml: Distributed arithmetic for real-time neural networks
on fpgas.ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable Technology and Systems([n. d.]).
[114] Shinya Takamaeda-Yamazaki. 2017. NNgen: A Fully-Customizable Hardware Synthesis Compiler for Deep Neural Network. https://github.com/
NNgen/nngen. Accessed April 23, 2025.
[115] Naif Tarafdar, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Philip C Harris, Jeffrey D Krupa, Vladimir Loncar, Dylan S Rankin, Nhan Tran, Zhenbin Wu, Qianfeng Shen,
and Paul Chow. 2021. Aigean: An open framework for deploying machine learning on heterogeneous clusters.ACM Transactions on Reconfigurable
Technology and Systems (TRETS)15, 3 (2021), 1–32.
[116] Riccardo Testa, Mohamad Yaacoub, Christian Gianoglio, and Maurizio Valle. 2025.FPGA Implementation of a Convolutional Recurrent Neural
Network for Real-Time Sensor Data Processing. Springer, Cham, 258. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-71518-1_30
[117] Neil C. Thompson and Svenja Spanuth. 2021. The decline of computers as a general purpose technology.Commun. ACM64, 3 (Feb. 2021), 64–72.
[118] Ho Fung Tsoi, Vladimir Loncar, Sridhara Dasu, and Philip Harris. 2025. SymbolNet: neural symbolic regression with adaptive dynamic pruning for
compression.Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.6 (2025), 015021. doi:10.1088/2632-2153/adaad8 arXiv:2401.09949 [cs.LG]
[119] Ho Fung Tsoi, Adrian Alan Pol, Vladimir Loncar, Ekaterina Govorkova, Miles Cranmer, Sridhara Dasu, Peter Elmer, Philip Harris, Isobel Ojalvo,
and Maurizio Pierini. 2024. Symbolic Regression on FPGAs for Fast Machine Learning Inference.EPJ Web Conf.295 (2024), 09036. doi:10.1051/
epjconf/202429509036 arXiv:2305.04099 [cs.LG]
[120] Yaman Umuroglu, Yash Akhauri, Nicholas James Fraser, and Michaela Blott. 2020. LogicNets: Co-designed neural networks and circuits for
extreme-throughput applications. In2020 30th International Conference on Field-Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL). IEEE, IEEE, Gothenburg,
Sweden, 291–297. doi:10.1109/FPL50879.2020.00055
Manuscript submitted to ACM
32 Jan-Frederik Schulte, Benjamin Ramhorst, Chang Sun et al.
[121] Yaman Umuroglu, Hendrik Borras, Vladimir Loncar, Sioni Summers, and Javier Duarte. 2022.fastmachinelearning/qonnx. doi:10.5281/zenodo.7622236
[122] Yaman Umuroglu, Nicholas J. Fraser, Giulio Gambardella, Michaela Blott, Philip Leong, Magnus Jahre, and Kees Vissers. 2017. FINN: A Framework
for Fast, Scalable Binarized Neural Network Inference. InProceedings of the 2017 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate
Arrays (FPGA ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 65.
[123] Yasuhiko NAKASHIMA Van-Cam NGUYEN. 2023. Implementation of Fully-Pipelined CNN Inference Accelerator on FPGA and HBM2 Platform.
IEICE TRANSACTIONS on InformationE106-D, 6 (June 2023), 1117–1129. doi:10.1587/transinf.2022EDP7155
[124] Stylianos I. Venieris and Christos-Savvas Bouganis. 2016. fpgaConvNet: A Framework for Mapping Convolutional Neural Networks on FPGAs. In
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE 24th Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM). IEEE, Washington,
DC, USA, 40–47. doi:10.1109/FCCM.2016.22
[125] Stylianos I. Venieris and Christos-Savvas Bouganis. 2016. fpgaConvNet: A Framework for Mapping Convolutional Neural Networks on FPGAs. In
2016 IEEE 24th Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM). IEEE, Washington, DC, USA, 40–47.
doi:10.1109/FCCM.2016.22
[126] Stylianos I. Venieris and Christos-Savvas Bouganis. 2017. Latency-Driven Design for FPGA-based Convolutional Neural Networks. InProceedings of
the 2017 27th International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL). IEEE, Ghent, Belgium, 1–8. doi:10.23919/FPL.2017.8056828
[127] Stylianos I. Venieris and Christos-Savvas Bouganis. 2019. fpgaConvNet: Mapping Regular and Irregular Convolutional Neural Networks on FPGAs.
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems30, 2 (2019), 326–342. doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2018.2856369
[128] Jure Vreča and Anton Biasizzo. 2023. Towards Deploying Highly Quantized Neural Networks on FPGA Using Chisel. In2023 26th Euromicro
Conference on Digital System Design (DSD). IEEE, Golem, Albania, 161–167. doi:10.1109/DSD60849.2023.00032
[129] Bernardita Štitić, Luca Urbinati, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Luca P. Carloni, and Mario R. Casu. 2024. Enhanced Machine-Learning Flow for
Microwave-Sensing Systems for Contaminant Detection in Food.IEEE Trans. AgriFood Electron.2, 2 (2024), 181. doi:10.1109/TAFE.2024.3421238
[130] Dong Wang, Ke Xu, and Diankun Jiang. 2017. PipeCNN: An OpenCL-based open-source FPGA accelerator for convolution neural networks. In
2017 International Conference on Field Programmable Technology (ICFPT). IEEE, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 279–282. doi:10.1109/FPT.2017.8280160
[131] Erwei Wang, James J. Davis, Daniele Moro, Piotr Zielinski, Jia Jie Lim, Claudionor Coelho, Satrajit Chatterjee, Peter Y. K. Cheung, and George A.
Constantinides. 2023. Enabling Binary Neural Network Training on the Edge.ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst.22, 6, Article 105 (Nov. 2023),
19 pages. doi:10.1145/3626100
[132] Ying Wang, Jie Xu, Yinhe Han, Huawei Li, and Xiaowei Li. 2016. DeepBurning: automatic generation of FPGA-based learning accelerators for the
neural network family. InProceedings of the 53rd Annual Design Automation Conference(Austin, Texas)(DAC ’16). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 110, 6 pages. doi:10.1145/2897937.2898003
[133] Y. Wei, R. F. Forelli, C. Hansen, J. P. Levesque, N. Tran, J. C. Agar, G. Di Guglielmo, M. E. Mauel, and G. A. Navratil. 2024. Low latency optical-based
mode tracking with machine learning deployed on FPGAs on a tokamak.Review of Scientific Instruments95, 7 (07 2024), 073509. doi:10.1063/5.0190354
arXiv:2312.00128
[134] Jason Weitz, Dmitri Demler, Luke McDermott, Nhan Tran, and Javier Duarte. 2025. Neural Architecture Codesign for Fast Physics Applications.
(2025). arXiv:2501.05515 [cs.LG]
[135] Jieun Yoo, Jennet Dickinson, Morris Swartz, Giuseppe Di Guglielmo, Alice Bean, Douglas Berry, Manuel Blanco Valentin, Karri DiPetrillo, Farah
Fahim, Lindsey Gray, et al. 2024. Smart pixel sensors: towards on-sensor filtering of pixel clusters with deep learning.Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech.5
(2024). doi:10.1088/2632-2153/ad6a00 arXiv:2310.02474 [physics.ins-det]
[136] Cheng Zhang, Jianyi Cheng, Zhewen Yu, and Yiren Zhao. 2023. MASE: An Efficient Representation for Software-Defined ML Hardware System
Exploration. InMachine Learning for Systems 2023. https://openreview.net/forum?id=Z7v6mxNVdU
[137] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang, Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. 2020. Graph
neural networks: A review of methods and applications.AI Open1 (2020), 57–81. doi:10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001
Manuscript submitted to ACM