1
Multimodal Mixture-of-Experts for ISAC in
Low-Altitude Wireless Networks
Kai Zhang,Graduate Student Member,IEEE, Wentao Yu,Member,IEEE, Hengtao He,Member,IEEE,
Shenghui Song,Senior Member,IEEE, Jun Zhang,Fellow,IEEE, and Khaled B. Letaief,Fellow,IEEE
Abstract—Integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) is a
key enabler for low-altitude wireless networks (LA WNs), provid-
ing simultaneous environmental perception and data transmission
in complex aerial scenarios. By combining heterogeneous sensing
modalities such as visual, radar, lidar, and positional information,
multimodal ISAC can improve both situational awareness and
robustness of LA WNs. However, most existing multimodal fusion
approaches use static fusion strategies that treat all modalities
equally and cannot adapt to channel heterogeneity or time-
varying modality reliability in dynamic low-altitude environ-
ments. To address this fundamental limitation, we propose a
mixture-of-experts (MoE) framework for multimodal ISAC in
LA WNs. Each modality is processed by a dedicated expert
network, and a lightweight gating module adaptively assigns
fusion weights according to the instantaneous informativeness
and reliability of each modality. To improve scalability under
the stringent energy constraints of aerial platforms, we further
develop a sparse MoE variant that selectively activates only a
subset of experts, thereby reducing computation overhead while
preserving the benefits of adaptive fusion. Comprehensive simu-
lations on three typical ISAC tasks in LA WNs demonstrate that
the proposed frameworks consistently outperform conventional
multimodal fusion baselines in terms of learning performance
and training sample efficiency.
Index Terms—6G, integrated sensing and communication
(ISAC), low-altitude wireless networks (LA WNs), mixture-of-
experts (MoE), multimodal learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid advancement of sixth-generation (6G) wire-
less networks is poised to revolutionize communication sys-
tems, shifting from conventional two-dimensional terrestrial
networks to three-dimensional ubiquitous connectivity [2],
[3]. Within this landscape, low-altitude wireless networks
(LAWNs) are emerging as a critical infrastructure. By de-
ploying unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs) as flexible wireless
relays, LAWNs form resilient three-dimensional communica-
tion links that bridge the coverage gaps of fixed terrestrial
This work was presented in part at IEEE International Symposium on
Personal, Indoor, Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Istanbul, Turkey,
Sept. 2025 [1].
Kai Zhang, Shenghui Song, Jun Zhang, and Khaled B. Letaief are
with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong
Kong (email: kzhangbn@connect.ust.hk, eeshsong@ust.hk, eejzhang@ust.hk,
eekhaled@ust.hk).
Wentao Yu was with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engi-
neering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water
Bay, Hong Kong. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4,
Canada (e-mail: wentaoyu@ece.ubc.ca).
Hengtao He is with the National Mobile Communications Research Labo-
ratory, Southeast University, Nanjing, China (hehengtao@seu.edu.cn).
infrastructure [4], [5]. This architecture enables rapid deploy-
ment of wireless coverage in disaster-affected and remote
areas where fixed infrastructure is unavailable or damaged
[6]. Consequently, LAWNs are increasingly used to support
applications such as intelligent aerial logistics [7], precision
agriculture [8], and large-scale infrastructure monitoring [9],
[10].
Despite great potentials, LAWNs must maintain reliable
wireless links while simultaneously performing real-time en-
vironmental perception in congested low-altitude airspace. To
tackle this challenge, integrated sensing and communication
(ISAC) has emerged as a new paradigm that promotes mutual
benefits between wireless communication and sensing within
a unified system [11], [12]. This is particularly important for
LAWNs, where the complex aerial conditions render isolated
communication or sensing unreliable. Specifically, the sensed
spatial information can stabilize wireless links in high-mobility
scenarios by enabling proactive beam alignment and blockage
prediction. In addition, reliable connectivity enables real-
time fusion of distributed sensing data, extending the sensing
coverage of individual UA Vs.
Given these promising capabilities, extensive research has
investigated the integration of ISAC into LAWN systems,
including advanced beamforming techniques [13], UA V tra-
jectory optimization [14], and spectrum-efficient resource al-
location [15]. Specifically, a substantial body of works have
investigated sensing-aided communication, utilizing environ-
mental awareness to facilitate robust UA V connectivity in high-
mobility aerial scenarios [16]–[19]. For instance, by leveraging
historical sensing data and extended Kalman filtering (EKF) to
predict target motion, Zhouet al.[16] enabled precise beam-
forming without pilots to boost communication throughput,
while Jianget al.[17] optimized UA V trajectory to guarantee
link maintenance. Focusing on reliability, Jianget al.[18]
maximized communication outage capacity by optimizing the
sensing duration and UA V trajectory based on the outage
probabilities predicted from sensing data. Furthermore, Meng
et al.[19] proposed a two-stage sensing protocol to acquire
target location information, thereby optimizing the phase shifts
of intelligent surface to maximize the achievable communica-
tion rate. Conversely, other studies explore communication-
aided sensing, exploiting ubiquitous wireless infrastructure to
extend environmental perception coverage and precision [20]–
[22]. For instance, Jiet al.[20] utilized existing long-term
evolution (LTE) communication signals to track drone trajec-
tories by analyzing Doppler frequency shifts, demonstrating
that communication waveforms can be repurposed for high-
arXiv:2512.01750v1  [eess.SP]  1 Dec 2025
2
precision sensing without dedicated hardware. Extending this
to networked cooperation, Yanget al.[21] proposed fusing
signals from distributed communication nodes to improve
sensing accuracy. To further exploit the potential of infras-
tructure cooperation, Luet al.[22] developed a symbol-level
fusion method that utilizes the distributed network to achieve
superior UA V localization and velocity estimation compared
to single-station approaches. While extensive studies have
advanced the development of ISAC in LAWN systems, they
primarily focused on unimodal sensing that leverages only
radio frequency (RF) signals, extracting environmental fea-
tures solely from communication signals such as channel state
information (CSI), received signal strength, or Doppler shifts.
Although RF-based sensing is ubiquitous, it provides only
coarse environmental perception and is sensitive to blockage,
multipath scattering, and low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs).
Consequently, reliance on a single sensing modality leads to
performance degradation under high-speed aerial dynamics,
compromising both the wireless connectivity and perception
reliability essential for LAWNs.
To mitigate these limitations, multimodal ISAC integrates
complementary sensing modalities to enhance both environ-
mental perception and communication reliability in LAWNs
[23], [24]. By synergizing heterogeneous sensing sources
(e.g., RF signals, visual images, and lidar point clouds), this
approach exploits the unique strengths of different modalities
to construct a high-fidelity spatial representation. For instance,
the weather resilience of radar can effectively offset visual
degradation in adverse conditions, while the high angular
resolution of lidar resolves the spatial ambiguity typical of
RF signals. Such fusion improves situational awareness and
robustness to modality-specific failures that occur in dynamic
aerial scenarios. Several recent works have investigated the
design of multimodal ISAC frameworks, developing different
fusion architectures to align and integrate heterogeneous sens-
ing modalities [25]–[29]. For instance, Zhuet al.[25] proposed
a cross-modal feature enhancement mechanism that fuses
image and radar data for multimodal beam prediction tasks,
demonstrating improved robustness under varying modality
quality. Moving towards more unified representations, Tariq
et al.[26] and Cuiet al.[27] explored transformer-based
architectures that fuse multiple sensing modalities for accu-
rate beam prediction and reliable communication in ISAC
systems. To further address the generalization limitations of
task-specific models, Chenget al.[28] introduced multimodal
large language models (MLLMs) into ISAC, leveraging their
scalable cross-modal capabilities. Specific to the low-altitude
airspace, Xieet al.[29] developed a transformer-based per-
ception fusion network that aligns vision, lidar, and radar data
for proactive beamforming in dynamic LAWN scenarios.
However, most existing multimodal fusion methods employ
static fusion strategies that treat all modalities equally and
cannot adapt to rapid environmental changes or time-varying
modality reliability in low-altitude environments. To address
this limitation, we propose a multimodal mixture-of-experts
(MoE) architecture that enables adaptive cross-modal fusion
for ISAC in LAWNs. Unlike static baselines, the proposed
architecture orchestrates a set of modality-specific expert
networks through an adaptive gating mechanism that assigns
data-dependent fusion weights to each modality. This design
allows the system to assess the instantaneous informativeness
of each modality and place greater weight on reliable signals
while down-weighting degraded ones. As a result, the fused
representation becomes more robust to large fluctuations in
sensing quality on high-speed aerial platforms in LAWNs.
A. Contributions
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows.
1. We establish a unified multimodal learning framework
for ISAC in LAWNs by modeling the relationship between
heterogeneous sensing modalities and RF communication sig-
nals as a generalized cross-modal prediction problem. This
formulation provides a common optimization paradigm that
seamlessly supports diverse perception and communication
tasks in low-altitude ISAC systems, including sensing-aided
beam prediction, channel estimation, and communication-
aided UA V trajectory tracking.
2. We propose a novel multimodal MoE architecture that or-
chestrates modality-specific expert networks through an adap-
tive gating mechanism, enabling dynamic context-aware fusion
based on the instantaneous informativeness and reliability of
each modality. To meet the energy and computation constraints
of aerial platforms, we further develop a sparse MoE variant
that activates only a subset of experts during inference while
preserving the benefits of adaptive fusion.
3. We conduct extensive simulations on representative ISAC
tasks in realistic LAWN scenarios, including sensing-aided
beam prediction, sensing-aided path loss prediction, and
communication-aided UA V trajectory tracking. Simulation re-
sults demonstrate that the proposed multimodal MoE and
sparse MoE frameworks consistently outperform conventional
multimodal fusion baselines in terms of learning performance
and training sample efficiency.
B. Organization and Notations
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II elaborates on the system model and formulates the
unified learning framework for ISAC in LAWNs. Section III
presents the proposed multimodal MoE architecture. Section
IV introduces the sparse MoE variant to address the resource
constraints of aerial platforms. Simulation results are presented
in Section V , and we conclude the paper in Section VI.
Notations:Column vectors and matrices are denoted by
boldface lowercase and boldface capital letters, respectively.
The symbolRdenotes the set of real numbers.C M×N repre-
sents the space of theM×Ncomplex-valued matrices.(·) T
and(·) H stand for the transpose and the conjugate transpose
of their arguments, respectively. Tr(A)denotes the trace of
matrixA.E[·]denotes the expectation operation.∇represents
the gradient operator.|·|and∥·∥stand for theℓ 1 andℓ 2 norm
of vectors, respectively.
II. SYSTEMMODEL ANDPROBLEMFORMULATION
In this section, we first elaborate on the multimodal ISAC
system model in LAWNs. We then establish a unified mul-
timodal learning framework that incorporates heterogeneous
3
Fig. 1. An illustration of multimodal ISAC in LAWNs, where a ground BS and UA Vs exploit heterogeneous sensing data to
support sensing-aided beam prediction, sensing-aided channel estimation, and communication-aided UA V trajectory tracking.
sensing modalities and RF communication signals to support
diverse perception and communication tasks. Finally, we in-
stantiate this framework through three representative ISAC
tasks to demonstrate its broad applicability.
A. Multimodal ISAC System Model
We consider a multimodal ISAC system deployed in
LAWNs, as shown in Fig. 1. The system comprises a ground
base station (BS) equipped withMantennas andKsingle-
antenna authorized UA Vs, denoted by the setK={1, . . . , K}.
The BS conducts downlink communication with the UA Vs
while simultaneously acquiring spatial and geometric infor-
mation of the propagation environment. In addition to RF
transceivers, both the BS and UA Vs are equipped with hetero-
geneous sensors, such as cameras, lidars, radars, and global
positioning systems (GPS). These heterogeneous sensing plat-
forms collectively provide multimodal observations of the
surrounding environment, which are exploited to enhance both
environmental perception and communication performance.
The communication and sensing models are detailed as fol-
lows.
1) Communication Model:We consider a frequency-
division duplexing millimeter-wave (mmWave) communica-
tion system operating over a flat block-fading channel. For the
downlink data transmission, letV(t) = [v 1(t), . . . ,vK(t)]∈
CM×K denote the beamforming matrix at the BS in time slot
t, where each column vectorv k(t)∈C M×1 corresponds to
the beamforming vector designated for thek-th UA V . Then,
the transmitted signal vector is given by
x(t) =
KX
k=1
vk(t)sk(t) =V(t)s(t),(1)
wheres(t) = [s 1(t), . . . , sK(t)]T ∈C K×1 is the vector of
transmitted symbols withE[|s k(t)|2] = 1. The BS transmis-
sion power is constrained by
Tr
 
V(t)VH(t)

≤P DL,(2)
whereP DL denotes the maximum downlink transmission
power.
Leth k(t)∈C M×1 denote the downlink channel between
the BS and UA Vkat time slott. We adopt a geometric multi-
path channel model [30], under which the downlink channel
is expressed as
hk(t) =
LpX
ℓ=1
αℓ,k(t)e −j2πfcτℓ,k(t)a
 
θℓ,k(t)

,(3)
whereL p is the number of propagation paths,f c is the
carrier frequency,α ℓ,k(t)is the path loss of theℓ-th path,
τℓ,k(t) =d ℓ,k(t)/cis the associated propagation delay with
dℓ,k(t)denoting the path length andcthe speed of light,
andθ ℓ,k(t)is the angle of departure (AoD). For a uniform
linear array (ULA) withMantenna elements and inter-element
spacingd ant, the array response vector corresponding to AoD
θℓ,k(t)is given by
a
 
θℓ,k(t)

=

1, ej 2π
λ dant sin(θℓ,k(t)), . . . , ej 2π
λ dant(M−1) sin(θℓ,k(t))T
,
(4)
whereλis the carrier wavelength. Accordingly, the received
signal at UA Vkat time slottcan be written as
yk(t) =hH
k (t)vk(t)sk(t) +
X
j̸=k
hH
k (t)vj(t)sj(t) +zk(t),(5)
wherez k(t)∼ CN(0, σ2
0)denotes the additive white Gaus-
sian noise with varianceσ 2
0. Consequently, the instantaneous
downlink sum-rate is expressed as
R(t) =
KX
k=1
log2
 
1 +
hH
k (t)vk(t)
2
P
j̸=k
hH
k (t)vj(t)
2
+σ 2
0
!
.(6)
2) Multimodal Sensing Model:To facilitate robust com-
munication and precise environmental perception within dy-
namic low-altitude scenarios, the multimodal ISAC framework
synergizes heterogeneous sensing modalities, capturing com-
plementary environmental features that augment the limited
spatial awareness provided by standard RF communication
4
signals. Formally, at time slott, the system aggregates a set
of heterogeneous sensing inputs, denoted as
S(t) ={Svis(t),S radar(t),S lidar(t),S pos(t)},(7)
whereS vis(t),S radar(t),S lidar(t), andS pos(t)denote the sensing
data from the vision, radar, lidar, and position modalities,
respectively. These data are obtained from sensors either
mounted on the UA Vs or co-located at the ground BS. While
S(t)is defined as a superset of potential sensing sources, our
framework is inherently flexible and can operate with available
subset of these modalities, depending on specific hardware
configurations or instantaneous sensor availability. The specific
characteristics and data representations of each modality are
detailed as follows.
•Visual modalityS vis(t): The vision modality leverages RGB
images to capture rich semantic and contextual information,
such as the spatial distribution of obstacles and dynamic
targets. Such visual data provide critical environmental
awareness for downstream ISAC tasks like beam prediction
and trajectory tracking. To optimize learning efficiency, the
raw visual data is preprocessed through spatial filtering
and background subtraction to suppress static environmental
noise and isolate dynamic regions of interest (e.g., moving
UA Vs), thereby distilling the most task-relevant features for
subsequent inference.
•Radar modalityS radar(t): The radar modality leverages
Doppler signatures to provide precise measurements of
target distance and relative velocity. Its primary advantage
lies in the inherent robustness against adverse environmental
conditions, such as fog, rain, or low light conditions, where
optical sensors may fail. By encapsulating these kinematic
characteristics, this modality offers critical motion infor-
mation that enables the ISAC system to accurately track
dynamic targets and anticipate mobility patterns even in
visually degraded scenarios.
•Lidar modalityS lidar(t): Providing high-resolution three-
dimensional geometric information, the lidar modality cap-
tures precise depth perception and spatial structural de-
tails that two-dimensional visual sensors inherently lack.
By offering a fine-grained volumetric representation of
the environment, this modality facilitates accurate spatial
reasoning, enabling the system to resolve complex object
shapes and determine precise physical locations essential
for environment-aware communication and sensing tasks.
•Position modalityS pos(t): Providing a macroscopic spatial
reference, the position modality supplies absolute localiza-
tion coordinates and long-term motion trends. Unlike local
environmental sensors, the position data offers a global
context for user movement, serving as a critical coarse-
grained information to anchor spatial relationships and guide
decision-making in large-scale dynamic scenarios.
Collectively, the integration of these sensing modalities en-
ables the construction of a comprehensive and task-relevant
environmental representation. This multi-dimensional aware-
ness is pivotal for supporting the dual objectives of robust
communication and precise sensing in dynamic low-altitude
environments.
B. Problem Formulation
To achieve robust perception and connectivity in dynamic
LAWNs, we formulate a unified multimodal learning frame-
work that models the interaction between heterogeneous sens-
ing modalities and RF communication signals as a general-
ized cross-modal prediction problem. This formulation unifies
diverse ISAC tasks under a common optimization paradigm,
enabling mutual performance enhancement by utilizing envi-
ronmental perception to optimize connectivity or leveraging
wireless signals to improve sensing precision.
Formally, at each time slott, the multimodal ISAC system
aggregates heterogeneous sensing inputsS(t)from different
sensing modalities such as vision, radar, and lidar. In parallel,
it incorporates RF link measurementsC(t), which encompass
wireless metrics including historical beam indices, received
signal strength indicators, and CSI. To accommodate diverse
task requirements, we define a unified system inputX(t)
by selectively aggregating heterogeneous sensing inputsS(t)
and RF link measurementsC(t). The resulting input space is
defined as
X(t)∈ {S(t),C(t),{S(t),C(t)}},(8)
which allows the predictive model to operate on either indi-
vidual domains or a composite measurement. We aim to learn
a parametric mapping functiong Θ that maps the system input
X(t)to a task-specific outputo(t), such as a discrete beam
index or a continuous UA V coordinate. The learning objective
is formulated as an expected risk minimization problem, where
we seek the optimal parametersΘthat minimize the expected
lossL(ˆ o(t),o(t))between the model outputˆ o(t)and the
corresponding ground trutho(t)as follows,
min
Θ
E[L(ˆ o(t),o(t))],
s.t.ˆ o(t) =gΘ(X(t)),
(9)
where the expectation is taken over the spatiotemporal variabil-
ity of the environment, channel states, and sensor observations.
This generalized formulation provides a versatile founda-
tion applicable to a broad spectrum of ISAC scenarios. By
customizing the output space and loss function, the framework
seamlessly applies to diverse problem paradigms. For instance,
definingo(t)as a beam index under cross-entropy loss re-
covers the beam prediction formulation, while settingo(t)
as a position vector under mean squared error (MSE) yields
the UA V trajectory tracking problem. To demonstrate this
adaptability, we formally instantiate this framework through
three representative ISAC tasks.
1) Sensing-Aided Channel Estimation:Precise acquisition
of CSI is pivotal for mmWave communications but poses
significant challenges in LAWNs due to the channel variations
caused by rapid mobility. To mitigate the overhead of dense
pilot signaling, we leverage heterogeneous multimodal sensing
dataS(t)as auxiliary side information to estimate the down-
link channel vectorh k(t). To specialize the general Problem
(9) for this task, we instantiate the system inputX(t)as the
multimodal sensing dataS(t)and the model outputˆ o(t)as
the estimated downlink channel vector ˆhk(t), i.e.,
X(t)≜S(t)andˆ o(t)≜ ˆhk(t).(10)
5
Consequently, the optimization objective is concretized as a
regression problem that minimizes the expected MSE between
the estimated channel ˆhk(t)and the ground truthh k(t), given
by
min
Θ
E
hk(t)− ˆhk(t)

2
s.t. ˆhk(t) =gΘ(S(t)).
(11)
By exploiting the rich spatial and semantic context provided
by UA V-mounted and BS-mounted sensors, this formulation
effectively captures the implicit correlations between envi-
ronmental features and signal propagation, thereby enhancing
CSI estimation accuracy while reducing the dependence on
conventional pilot-based methods.
2) Sensing-Aided Beamforming Design:Efficient beam
management is paramount for UA V-enabled mmWave com-
munication systems, yet traditional beam sweeping incurs
prohibitive latency overheads given the highly directional
transmission and rapid aerial mobility. To enable low-latency
beam management, we instantiate the unified Problem (9) as a
proactive beam prediction task, which leverages heterogeneous
sensing data to directly predict the optimal beamforming
configuration. Specifically, the system inputX(t)and output
ˆ o(t)are respectively instantiated as the multimodal sensing
dataS(t)and the estimated beamforming vectors{ˆ v k(t)}K
k=1
for all UA Vs, i.e.,
X(t)≜S(t)andˆ o(t)≜{ˆ v k(t)}K
k=1.(12)
The general learning objective is specialized to maximize the
instantaneous downlink sum-rate as follows,
max
Θ
E
" KX
k=1
log2
 
1 + |hH
k (t)ˆ vk(t)|2
P
j̸=k |hH
k (t)ˆ vj(t)|2 +σ 2
0
!#
s.t.ˆ vk(t) =gΘ(S(t)),∀k,
(13)
whereh k(t)denotes the downlink channel vector between the
BS and UA Vk, andσ 2
0 is the noise power. By bypassing
explicit channel estimation and exhaustive search, this ap-
proach effectively leverages the spatial intelligence embedded
in multimodal observations to achieve accurate, mobility-
aware beam selection, thereby stabilizing connectivity against
the dynamic fluctuations of the low-altitude channel.
3) Communication-Aided UAV Trajectory Tracking:Ac-
curate trajectory tracking is indispensable for maintaining
reliable connectivity in LAWNs, yet relying solely on onboard
sensors often leads to the degradation of localization accuracy
due to signal blockage or inertial drift. To address this chal-
lenge, we employ onboard sensing dataS(t)with downlink
RF measurementsC(t)to achieve high-precision positioning.
Specifically, the system inputX(t)and outputˆ o(t)in Problem
(9) are respectively instantiated as the joint sensing and RF
measurements{S(t),C(t)}and estimated UA V positionˆ p(t),
i.e.,
X(t)≜{S(t),C(t)}andˆ o(t)≜ˆ p(t).(14)
The optimization objective is concretized as a trajectory re-
gression problem that minimizes the cumulative position error
over the time horizon as follows,
min
Θ
E
" tX
τ=t−L
∥p(τ)− ˆp(τ)∥2
#
s.t. ˆp(τ) =gΘ({S(τ),C(τ)}),∀τ∈[t−L, t],
(15)
wherep(τ)represents the ground-truth coordinates at time
slotτ. By integrating these sources, the system utilizes RF
observations to correct long-term sensor drift while leveraging
sensing data to sustain trajectory estimation during signal
interruptions, ensuring reliable localization in low-altitude
environments.
C. Existing Approaches
Multimodal data fusion in ISAC systems has evolved
through various paradigms. In this subsection, we categorize
representative methods into two primary classes, namely static
fusion strategies [25] and monolithic neural architectures [27]–
[29], and highlight their respective limitations to motivate the
design of our proposed method.
1) Static fusion strategies:The most straightforward ap-
proach to multimodal fusion relies on fixed rules or hand-
crafted heuristics. Formally, letDdenote the total number
of modalities. For each modalityd, an intermediate feature
embeddingz d(t)is first extracted from the raw input. These
modality-specific embeddings are then aggregated into a joint
representationz(t)via deterministic operations:
•Direct Concatenation [25]: Feature vectors from dif-
ferent modalities are concatenated into a single high-
dimensional vector
z(t) = [z1(t)T, . . . ,zD(t)T]T,(16)
which is subsequently fed into a downstream predictor.
•Weighted Summation: Features are combined using pre-
assigned scalar weights as follows,
z(t) =
DX
d=1
wdzd(t),(17)
wherew d is typically determined by expert knowledge
or heuristic confidence estimates.
Although computationally efficient and easy to implement,
such static strategies fuse all inputs using pre-assigned and
fixed weights, regardless of their instantaneous quality. This
limitation is particularly critical in dynamic LAWNs, where
sensor reliability fluctuates rapidly due to blockage or adverse
environmental conditions. Consequently, static fusion strate-
gies fail to filter out degraded sensing data, inevitably leading
to performance degradation.
2) Monolithic neural architectures:To overcome the lim-
itations of static fusion, recent research has shifted toward
unified deep learning frameworks, such as multimodal trans-
formers [27], [29] and MLLMs [28]. These approaches employ
a monolithic architecture where heterogeneous inputs are
projected onto a shared latent space and processed through
a dense backbone to capture cross-modal correlations. How-
ever, this design presents critical bottlenecks for the practical
ISAC deployment in LAWNs. First, sharing parameters across
6
Fig. 2. Architecture of the proposed multimodal MoE framework. Modality-specific experts extract features from heterogeneous
inputs, which are aggregated via weighted summation using coefficients from a gating network to form a fused representation
for the prediction head.
modalities often leads to modality interference, where dom-
inant sensors (e.g., vision) suppress the learning of others,
reducing robustness when the primary source fails. Second,
these models enforce unconditional computation, activating the
full network for every inference step regardless of data quality.
This processing overhead creates a significant energy burden
for battery-powered UA Vs, hindering deployment in resource-
constrained aerial scenarios.
In summary, static fusion strategies are computationally
efficient but rely on fixed fusion rules that cannot adapt to
changing modality quality or dynamic environments. In con-
trast, monolithic neural architectures that process all modal-
ities jointly offer strong representation power but incur high
computational cost and cross-modal interference because all
modality-specific branches are always activated, even when
some modalities are noisy or uninformative. To address both
the lack of adaptivity in static fusion and the high cost of
monolithic neural architectures, we propose a multimodal
MoE framework in the following section. Instead of a single
monolithic network, our approach uses a modular architecture
in which specialized expert networks are coordinated by a
gating mechanism that adaptively weights experts based on the
current input. This design effectively combines environmental
adaptability with computational efficiency, enabling the system
to intelligently prioritize reliable sensing modalities for robust
perception while minimizing the energy burden on resource-
constrained aerial platforms.
III. PROPOSEDMULTIMODALMOE FRAMEWORK
In this section, we present the proposed multimodal MoE
framework, specifically designed to address the dynamic re-
quirements of ISAC in LAWNs. As illustrated in Fig. 2,
the architecture consists of modality-specific expert networks
and a modality-aware gating network. We first detail the
mathematical formulation of these components, followed by
the description of the end-to-end training procedure.
A. Multimodal MoE Architecture
To effectively extract discriminative features from hetero-
geneous modalities, the proposed framework constructs a set
of parallel expert networks. Unlike monolithic architectures
that enforce a unified processing path, our design adopts a
modular approach where each sensing modality is handled
by a dedicated expert network. We define thed-th expert
as a non-linear mapping functiong d(·;θ d), parameterized by
the trainable weightsθ d. The complete ensemble of experts
is denoted asE={g d(·;θ d)}D
d=1. This decoupled structure
allows each expert to employ a distinct inductive bias tailored
to the specific data format of its corresponding modality. For
a given time slott, letX(t) ={X d(t)}D
d=1 represent the set
of synchronized multimodal inputs. Each expert processes its
specific inputX d(t)to generate the high-dimensional feature
embeddingz d(t)as
zd(t) =gd(Xd(t);θ d),∀d.(18)
To improve the feature representation for downstream ISAC
tasks, the neural architecture of each expert is specifically cus-
tomized to align with the characteristics of its corresponding
modality. For instance, since visual images are rich in spatial
patterns and object details, the visual expert typically utilizes
powerful feature extractors such as ResNet [31] or vision trans-
formers [32] to interpret complex semantic context. In contrast,
radar signals often contain time-varying motion information.
To capture these dynamic attributes including target range
and velocity, the radar expert employs architectures suited
for sequential or spectral processing, such as convolutional
neural networks [33] or long short-term memory models
[34]. Furthermore, handling lidar data requires a different
7
approach because they consist of scattered and unordered
three-dimensional points rather than a regular image grid.
Consequently, the lidar expert leverages specialized geometric
networks including PointNet [35] or voxel-based methods
[36] to accurately reconstruct spatial depth and structure.
This tailored design ensures that the unique strengths of each
sensing modality are fully preserved and utilized in the final
fusion process.
While independent feature extraction effectively captures
modality-specific patterns, relying solely on isolated process-
ing neglects the complex interactions between heterogeneous
data modalities. In practical deployment over LAWNs, the
reliability of each sensing modality fluctuates dynamically due
to changing environmental conditions and sensor limitations.
Consequently, fusion strategies that assign static or uniform
weights often lead to suboptimal performance when some
modalities are corrupted. To overcome this limitation, it is
critical to equip the framework with an adaptive mechanism
capable of assessing the instantaneous contribution of each
expert. Motivated by this, we propose a modality-aware gating
network that dynamically evaluates the relative importance of
diverse inputs to generate context-aware fusion weights, as
detailed in the subsequent subsection.
B. Modality-Aware Gating Network
The modality-aware gating network functions as the cen-
tral decision module within the proposed multimodal MoE
framework. While the expert networks focus on extracting
deep semantic features from each modality, the gating net-
work is tasked with evaluating the global context to deter-
mine the instantaneous reliability of each expert. In dynamic
low-altitude environments, factors such as variable lighting,
blockage, or signal clutter can cause the informativeness of
individual modalities to fluctuate rapidly. Consequently, static
fusion strategies that assign fixed weights fail to adapt to
these variations and exhibit performance degradation when a
primary sensor is compromised. To overcome this limitation,
the gating network learns to model the uncertainty associated
with each modality and dynamically generates a probability
distribution over the experts, effectively prioritizing reliable
signals while suppressing noisy or irrelevant inputs.
Formally, the gating network is defined as a learnable non-
linear mappingg gate(·;θ gate)parameterized byθ gate. It accepts
the synchronized multimodal input setX(t)as context and
computes a vector of normalized gating coefficients. These
coefficients represent the relative contribution of each modality
at time slottand are calculated via the softmax function as
[w1(t), w2(t), . . . , wD(t)] =softmax(ggate(X(t);θ gate)),
(19)
where the softmax activation ensures that the generated
weights are non-negative and sum to one, i.e.,
DX
d=1
wd(t) = 1,
wd(t)≥0,∀d.
(20)
In terms of architecture, the gating network is designed to
be computationally lightweight to minimize inference latency.
It typically comprises a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with
non-linear activation functions. The processing flow begins
by aggregating the heterogeneous inputs into a shared latent
embedding to capture cross-modal dependencies and environ-
mental context. This compact representation is subsequently
projected into a vector of raw logits, which are then normalized
to produce the final fusion weights. Furthermore, the specific
architecture of the gating network is adaptable to the complex-
ity of the input data modality. For instance, when processing
high-dimensional inputs like visual images or radar maps, the
network may incorporate lightweight convolutional layers or
global average pooling operations to extract global context
descriptors before the dense gating layers. This flexible design
enables accurate assessment of modality relevance without
imposing a significant computational burden.
Upon obtaining the normalized gating weights, the fi-
nal fused multimodal representationz(t)is computed as a
weighted aggregation of the modality-specific expert embed-
dings{z d(t)}D
d=1 as follows,
z(t) =
DX
d=1
wd(t)z d(t).(21)
This aggregated feature vector captures complementary infor-
mation extracted from heterogeneous sensing modalities and
serves as the input to the task-specific prediction head. For-
mally, we define the prediction head as a non-linear mapping
go(·;θ o), parameterized byθ o, which transforms the fused
representationz(t)into the final task-specific prediction ˆo(t)
as follows,
ˆo(t) =go(z(t);θ o).(22)
The architecture of the prediction headg o(·;θ o)is customized
to the specific nature of the downstream ISAC task:
•For classification tasks, such as predicting the optimal
beam index, the network ends with a softmax layer that
outputs a probability distribution across all possible cat-
egories and is trained using a cross-entropy loss function
to select the most likely candidates.
•For regression tasks, such as estimating channel parame-
ters or tracking UA V trajectories, the network ends with
linear output units. This configuration directly predicts
continuous numerical values and is optimized by mini-
mizing the error between the predicted and actual values,
typically using MSE.
In summary, by jointly optimizing the modality-specific ex-
perts{g d(·;θ d)}D
d=1, the adaptive gating networkg gate(·;θ gate),
and the prediction headg o(·;θ o), the proposed multimodal
MoE framework establishes a robust end-to-end learning
paradigm for multimodal ISAC. This mechanism enables the
system to dynamically balance modality contributions based
on real-time environmental contexts, thereby significantly
enhancing predictive accuracy and resilience against sensor
uncertainties in dynamic low-altitude scenarios.
C. Algorithm Development
In this subsection, we present the training procedure for the
proposed multimodal MoE framework in detail. Specifically,
8
our objective is to jointly optimize the parameters of the
expert networks, the modality-aware gating network, and the
subsequent prediction head. To this end, we formulate the
training as a general supervised learning problem using a
labeled multimodal dataset.
Given a training dataset of synchronized multimodal inputs
and ground-truth labels, denoted asD={(X(t),o(t))} T
t=1,
our goal is to minimize the empirical risk as measured by
the loss functionL(·). Depending on the specific ISAC task,
the loss functionL(·)can be chosen as binary cross-entropy
(BCE) for classification tasks (e.g., proactive blockage pre-
diction), MSE for regression tasks (e.g., channel estimation),
or negative sum-rate loss for beamforming optimization tasks.
Formally, the complete parameter optimization problem can
be expressed as
min
{θd}D
d=1,θgate,θo
1
T
TX
t=1
L
 
ˆ o(t),o(t)

,(23)
where the prediction output ˆo(t)is obtained by sequentially
computing expert outputs, modality-aware fusion weights,
fused representations, and final predictions as follows,
zd(t) =gd(Xd(t);θ d),∀d,
[w1(t), . . . , wD(t)] =softmax(ggate(X(t);θ gate)),
z(t) =
DX
d=1
wd(t)zd(t),
ˆo(t) =go(z(t);θ o).
(24)
The complete end-to-end training procedure is formally
summarized in Algorithm 1. By minimizing the task-specific
lossL(·)via backpropagation, the framework jointly opti-
mizes the expert backbones, the gating mechanism, and the
prediction head within a unified computational graph. This
joint training process allows the model to learn a context-
aware fusion policy that dynamically recalibrates modality
weights based on the instantaneous environmental state. As
a result, the trained multimodal MoE framework tends to
exploit information from reliable sensing modalities while
reducing the influence of degraded ones, leading to robust
performance across diverse ISAC applications in dynamic low-
altitude environments.
IV. SPARSEMULTIMODALMOE FRAMEWORK
In this section, we propose a sparse multimodal MoE frame-
work to meet the stringent energy and computation constraints
of the aerial platforms in LAWNs. By selectively activating
only the top-Nmost relevant experts via a sparse routing
mechanism, this variant avoids unnecessary processing and
reduces resource overhead while maintaining adaptive fusion.
A. Sparse Expert Activation
While the proposed multimodal MoE framework offers
comprehensive fusion, activating allDexperts for every infer-
ence step imposes a computational burden that challenges the
energy constraints of aerial platforms. However, as evidenced
by the performance comparison in Fig. 3, the accuracy gain
Algorithm 1:Training Procedure of the Proposed
Multimodal MoE Framework.
Input:Training datasetD={(X(t),o(t))} T
t=1,
initialized expert network parameters{θ d}D
d=1,
gating network parametersθ gate, prediction
head parametersθ o, learning rateη.
1forepoch= 1,2, . . . , Edo
2Shuffle the training datasetD;
3foreach training sample(X(t),o(t))∈ Ddo
4Compute modality-specific expert embeddings:
zd(t) =gd(Xd(t);θ d),∀d; (25)
5Compute modality-aware fusion weights:
[w1(t), . . . , wD(t)] =softmax(ggate(X(t);θ gate));
(26)
6Compute fused multimodal representation:
z(t) =
DX
d=1
wd(t)zd(t); (27)
7Compute final prediction output:
ˆo(t) =go(z(t);θ o); (28)
8Evaluate supervised loss function:
Lt =L(o(t), ˆo(t)); (29)
9Compute gradients via backpropagation:
∇θdLt,∀d;∇ θgate Lt;∇ θoLt; (30)
10Update parameters with gradient descent:
θd ←θ d −η∇ θdLt,∀d;
θgate ←θ gate −η∇ θgate Lt;
θo ←θ o −η∇ θoLt;
(31)
11end
12end
Output:Expert parameters{θ d}D
d=1, gating parameter
θgate, and prediction head parameterθ o.
from integrating additional modalities exhibits clear diminish-
ing returns. Specifically, the marginal improvement decreases
significantly as the number of modalities grows (e.g., the gap
between 3 and 4 modalities is minimal), implying that fully
activating the entire expert ensemble is often unnecessary and
computationally redundant.
To capitalize on this observation, we propose a sparse
multimodal MoE framework that adaptively activates differ-
ent experts. By dynamically selecting only the top-Nmost
informative experts per input (withN < D), this approach
effectively prunes redundant branches. This yields a favorable
trade-off between inference accuracy and computational effi-
ciency for real-time aerial applications. Specifically, the sparse
MoE shares the same expert pool and gating network as the
dense model. At each time slott, the gating network first
produces a set of fusion scores[w 1(t), . . . , wD(t)]as in the
dense case. Instead of using all experts, the sparse variant only
activates those associated with the largest scores. Concretely,
9
Fig. 3. Top-1 beam prediction accuracy across different com-
binations of sensing modalities.
we select the indices of the top-Nexperts that are most
relevant for the current multimodal observation as
S(t) =TopN
 
w1(t), . . . , wD(t)

,(32)
where TopN(·)returns the indices of theNlargest entries
among{w d(t)}D
d=1. Based on this set, we define a binary
activation mask to indicate whether thed-th expert is activated
at time slott, given by
md(t) =
(
1,ifd∈ S(t),
0,otherwise, d= 1, . . . , D.
In the multimodal MoE proposed in Section III, all expert em-
beddings{z d(t)}D
d=1 are computed and combined according
to the normalized weights. In contrast, the sparse MoE only
evaluates the experts withm d(t) = 1. That is, for each time
slott, we compute
zd(t) =gd(Xd(t);θ d)only ifm d(t) = 1,
and skip the forward pass through the remaining experts,
which directly leads to a reduction in computational cost
and memory access. To ensure that the fused representation
remains a convex combination of the active expert outputs,
we renormalize the original weights over the selected subset
as
˜wd(t) = md(t)wd(t)PD
j=1 mj(t)wj(t) +ε
, d= 1, . . . , D,(33)
whereε >0is a small constant added for numerical stability.
By construction,˜w d(t)≥0and PD
d=1 ˜wd(t) = 1, and
˜wd(t) = 0for all inactive experts withm d(t) = 0. With
these sparsified weights, the fused multimodal representation
is given by
˜ z(t) =
DX
d=1
˜wd(t)z d(t),(34)
where the sum effectively runs only over theNactive experts.
Compared to the dense case, the sparse MoE preserves the gat-
ing behavior, since largerw d(t)still leads to larger normalized
weights˜wd(t), while reducing computation and memory cost
from evaluating allDexperts to onlyN < Dexperts per time
slot.
B. Training Procedure with Sparse Activation
The integration of the top-Nselection operator introduces
a non-differentiable step into the computational graph, which
blocks the flow of gradients required for standard back-
propagation. To circumvent this issue and enable end-to-end
optimization, we employ the straight-through estimator (STE)
[37]. This technique decouples the forward execution from
the backward gradient approximation, allowing the network
to make hard routing decisions while remaining differentiable
for parameter updates.
During the forward propagation phase, the system performs
selective execution, activating only the experts deemed most
relevant. The gating network generates the raw probability
vectorw(t), which is then processed by the non-differentiable
top-Noperator to yield a binary mask and the renormalized
sparse weights˜ w(t). Consequently, only the selected subset of
experts contributes to the fused representationz(t), improving
computational efficiency. In contrast, during the backward
propagation phase, the STE heuristic approximates the hard
top-Noperation as an identity function for the purpose of
gradient calculation. Specifically, we assume that the gradients
flow through the discrete selection layer without attenuation.
Formally, the gradient of the loss functionLwith respect to the
original gating weightsw(t)is approximated by the gradients
computed for the sparsified weights˜ w(t)as follows,
∂L
∂w(t) ≈ ∂L
∂˜ w(t).(35)
This approximation implies that if an expert is activated, its
gradient contribution is backpropagated directly to the gating
network. If an expert is inactive (i.e.,˜w d(t) = 0), it receives
no gradient update for that instance. This mechanism allows
the gating parameterθ g to be updated via stochastic gradient
descent despite the discrete nature of the inference process.
Under this training paradigm, the overall learning objective
remains consistent with the empirical risk minization problem
in (23). By leveraging the STE, the sparse MoE framework
effectively learns an adaptive and sparsity-constrained routing
policy that balances prediction accuracy with the stringent
resource limitations in practical LAWNs.
C. Computational Benefits and Practical Considerations
The sparse MoE framework inherits the architectural flexi-
bility of the multimodal MoE in Section III, while achieving
significantly improved computational efficiency. Given that
onlyNexperts are evaluated per input (withN < D), the total
computational cost per forward pass is reduced fromO(D)to
O(N). The same reduction applies to memory and energy
usage, making the sparse MoE model particularly attractive
for deployment on embedded processors and real-time UA V
platforms. Additionally, by enforcing sparsity at inference
time, the model inherently introduces a form of regularization
that mitigates overfitting, especially under limited training data
or noisy sensor inputs. The ability to deactivate uninformative
or redundant modalities also improves robustness under partial
modality failures, particularly when vision or lidar becomes
unreliable during adverse weather conditions.
10
In practice, the value ofNcan be treated as a tun-
able hyperparameter that balances accuracy and efficiency.
A smallerNyields faster inference but may omit useful
modality information, while a largerNimproves performance
but increases resource demands. To enhance stability during
training, it is often beneficial to start with a relatively largerN
and gradually anneal it using a predefined schedule or entropy-
based gating regularization, so that the model progressively
learns to rely on a compact subset of experts. Moreover,
the sparse MoE framework is fully compatible with other
multimodal extensions, including hierarchical expert routing
[38] and uncertainty-aware gating [39]. These extensions can
further improve specialization and generalization in complex
ISAC scenarios, and can be readily integrated on top of the
sparse routing mechanism.
In summary, the sparse multimodal MoE framework pro-
vides a lightweight yet adaptive solution for efficient ISAC
inference. By activating only a subset of experts based on
modality-aware gating, the model achieves favorable trade-
offs between computational cost, robustness, and prediction
performance. In the next section, we evaluate the proposed
multimodal MoE and sparse multimodal MoE frameworks
under multiple ISAC tasks in realistic LAWN scenarios to
quantitatively demonstrate these benefits.
V. SIMULATIONRESULTS
In this section, we conduct comprehensive simulations to
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed multimodal MoE
frameworks in realistic LAWN scenarios. The evaluation cov-
ers three representative ISAC tasks under various baseline
fusion strategies and performance metrics.
A. Simulation Setups
We evaluate the proposed multimodal MoE frameworks
using a public multimodal ISAC dataset for low-altitude
scenarios [40], [41], which provides synchronized RF com-
munication data and heterogeneous sensing modalities. Fig. 4
illustrates a representative scene from the dataset, showing
the environment from both the ground BS and UA V perspec-
tives, with UA Vs highlighted in red boxes. We consider three
representative ISAC tasks: i)sensing-aided beam prediction,
where the model predicts the optimal beam index from sensing
inputs and is evaluated by top-1 beam accuracy; ii)sensing-
aided path loss prediction, where the model predicts downlink
path loss and is evaluated by the MSE between estimated
and ground-truth values; and iii)communication-aided UAV
trajectory tracking, where the UA V position is regressed from
sensing and communication features, and evaluated by MSE
and average Euclidean distance between predicted and ground-
truth positions.
For the sensing model, each UA V is equipped with an
RGB camera and lidar sensor, while the BS carries frequency-
modulated continuous wave (FMCW) radars operating at
77–81 GHz. The sensing data includes RGB images, lidar
point clouds, mmWave radar point clouds, and GPS posi-
tion information captured across 3,000 time slots. For the
communication model, we simulate the wireless channels at
(a) UA V perspective.
(b) Ground BS perspective.
Fig. 4. Illustration of a representative scene from the mul-
timodal ISAC dataset in LAWNs, showing the environment
from the ground BS and UA V perspectives. UA Vs are marked
in red boxes.
5.915 GHz with 20 MHz bandwidth. The UA Vs are equipped
with 4-element ULAs, and the resulting data includes 30,000
time slots of complex-valued channel impulse responses and
path loss values under dynamic propagation conditions. The
RF communication and multimodal sensing data are fully
synchronized to enable multimodal fusion.
For the learning model, we implement a multimodal MoE
architecture with5sensing modalities: vision images, lidar,
radar, position information, and RF communication signals.
Each modality is assigned a group of 3 parallel experts,
resulting in a total of 15 expert subnetworks. In the sparse
MoE variant, we activate a subset of 5 experts out of the total
15 for each input, and their weights are renormalized prior to
aggregation. For image-based modalities, each expert adopts
a ResNet-18 backbone [31]; for point-cloud-based modalities,
each expert is implemented using a PointNet backbone [35].
The modality-aware gating network is a three-layer MLP with
128 hidden units and ReLU activations, followed by a softmax
layer to produce normalized fusion weights. All models are
trained using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of10 −3
and batch size of64. We split the entire dataset into 70% for
training and 30% for testing, and all results are reported on
the testing set.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed multimodal
11
Fig. 5. Comparison of Top-1 beam prediction accuracy for
the proposed multimodal MoE frameworks and benchmark
methods.
MoE and sparse MoE frameworks, we compare them against
the following representative baselines.
•Single-modality baselines[42], [43]: We include vision-
only and lidar-only models, where each modality is pro-
cessed independently using the same expert network ar-
chitecture without any fusion. These serve as lower-bound
references for unimodal performance.
•Feature concatenation fusion[25]: Multimodal features
from all modalities are concatenated after backbone en-
coding and fed into a shared MLP prediction head. This
represents a common and straightforward fusion strategy.
•Multimodal transformer[27], [29]: A transformer en-
coder is employed to model cross-modal interactions by
attending over modality-specific token embeddings. Self-
attention and cross-attention mechanisms enable the net-
work to dynamically capture inter-modal dependencies and
contextual correlations across sensing streams.
•Multimodal LLM[28]: We adopt a pretrained LLM
by projecting sensor features into a shared embedding
space followed by fine-tuning. This baseline highlights the
performance of large-scale pretrained fusion.
B. Sensing-Aided Beam Prediction
In this subsection, we evaluate model performance on the
sensing-aided beam prediction task, where the goal is to select
the optimal downlink beam index based on multimodal sensing
inputs. As shown in Fig. 5, the proposed multimodal MoE and
sparse MoE frameworks significantly outperform all baselines
in terms of top-1 prediction accuracy. The dense multimodal
MoE model achieves the best final performance, while the
sparse MoE maintains competitive accuracy with fewer active
experts, demonstrating its efficiency. The superior results can
be attributed to the adaptive gating mechanism, which assigns
dynamic fusion weights to expert subnetworks, allowing the
model to selectively emphasize informative modalities under
varying channel and environmental conditions.
Fig. 6. Comparison of NMSE performance for sensing-aided
path loss prediction using the proposed multimodal MoE
frameworks and benchmark methods.
Among the baselines, the multimodal transformer and mul-
timodal LLM benefit from stronger representation capacity
and attention mechanisms, achieving better performance than
early fusion via feature concatenation. However, their perfor-
mance remains below the MoE-based models due to the lack
of explicit expert specialization across modalities. Unimodal
baselines (vision-only and lidar-only) show limited accuracy,
confirming that leveraging diverse and complementary sensing
modalities is essential for robust beam prediction in dynamic
low-altitude environments.
C. Sensing-Aided Path Loss Prediction
In this subsection, we evaluate all methods on the task
of sensing-aided path loss prediction, where the goal is to
estimate the downlink path loss using multimodal sensing
features. Fig. 6 reports the normalized mean squared error
(NMSE) curves in dB scale over training epochs. The proposed
multimodal MoE achieves the lowest NMSE, followed closely
by the sparse MoE, which performs nearly on par while
requiring fewer active experts. These results highlight the
advantage of using adaptive modality-aware expert selection
to adaptively predict path loss under varying environmental
conditions and blockage states.
Compared to the baselines, the multimodal transformer
and LLM deliver improved performance over early fusion
approaches by modeling cross-modal correlations and utilizing
large-scale pretraining, respectively. However, they remain
outperformed by MoE-based methods due to their lack of
explicit expert specialization and adaptive routing. Meanwhile,
unimodal baselines (vision-only and lidar-only) suffer from
limited expressiveness, reflecting the insufficiency of single-
modality inputs in accurately capturing fine-grained propaga-
tion loss variations in complex environments.
12
Fig. 7. Comparison of NMSE performance for
communication-aided UA V trajectory tracking using the
multimodal MoE frameworks and benchmark methods.
D. Communication-Aided UAV Trajectory Tracking
In this subsection, we evaluate the proposed multimodal
MoE method and sparse MoE on the task of UA V trajectory
tracking, where the objective is to predict the UA V’s 3D
position at each time step based on multimodal sensing and RF
communication inputs. This task is essential for autonomous
navigation in dynamic low-altitude environments, where accu-
rate trajectory estimation enables proactive control and reliable
mobility support.
Fig. 7 shows the NMSE in dB scale across training epochs.
As observed, the proposed multimodal MoE achieves the low-
est NMSE, indicating superior estimation accuracy, while the
sparse MoE maintains comparable performance with reduced
computational overhead. These results validate the effective-
ness of adaptive expert selection in capturing complex path-
dependent signal variations. Among the baselines, the mul-
timodal transformer and multimodal LLM achieve moderate
improvements over the static fusion baseline by leveraging
attention mechanisms and pretrained multimodal embeddings,
respectively. However, their fusion lacks explicit modality spe-
cialization, resulting in inferior performance compared to the
MoE-based architectures. Unimodal methods (vision-only and
lidar-only) consistently underperform, highlighting the limi-
tations of single-modality inputs in accurately reconstructing
continuous trajectories amidst sensor drift and environmental
blockage.
To further illustrate the model’s performance, Fig. 8a and
Fig. 8b visualize the predicted trajectory generated by the
multimodal MoE alongside the ground-truth UA V path. The
predicted positions exhibit close alignment with the true tra-
jectory, particularly around direction changes and elevation
variations, demonstrating the model’s ability to accurately
track UA V motion in dynamic low-altitude scenarios.
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Fig. 8. Comparison between predicted and ground-truth UA V
trajectories using the proposed multimodal MoE framework.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have investigated multimodal ISAC in
LAWNs, leveraging heterogeneous sensing modalities and
communication signals to achieve robust environmental per-
ception and reliable connectivity in dynamic aerial environ-
ments. We have formulated a general learning-based opti-
mization framework for multimodal ISAC, which has been
instantiated across three representative ISAC tasks. To address
the challenges of modality heterogeneity and time-varying
reliability, we have proposed a multimodal MoE architecture
that adaptively assigns modality-specific fusion weights via a
learnable gating network. Additionally, we have developed a
sparse MoE variant that reduces inference costs by selectively
activating a subset of expert networks, while preserving the
benefits of adaptive fusion. Extensive simulations on three
representative ISAC tasks in LAWNs have demonstrated that
the proposed methods consistently outperform conventional
multimodal fusion baselines in terms of learning performance
and training sample efficiency.
13
REFERENCES
[1] K. Zhang, W. Yu, H. He, S. Song, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief,
“Multimodal deep learning-empowered beam prediction in future THz
ISAC systems,” inProc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor Mobile Radio
Commun. (PIMRC), Istanbul, Turkey, pp. 1–6, Sept. 2025.
[2] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y . Shi, J. Zhang, and Y .-J. A. Zhang, “The
roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks,”IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, 2019.
[3] K. B. Letaief, Y . Shi, J. Lu, and J. Lu, “Edge artificial intelligence for
6G: Vision, enabling technologies, and applications,”IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 5–36, 2022.
[4] J. Qiu, D. Grace, G. Ding, M. D. Zakaria, and Q. Wu, “Air-ground
heterogeneous networks for 5G and beyond via integrating high and low
altitude platforms,”IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 140–
148, 2019.
[5] W. Yuan, Y . Cui, J. Wang, F. Liu, G. Sun, T. Xiang, J. Xu, S. Jin,
D. Niyato, S. Coleri, S. Sun, S. Mao, A. Jamalipour, D. I. Kim, M.-S.
Alouini, and X. Shen, “From ground to sky: Architectures, applications,
and challenges shaping low-altitude wireless networks,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.12308, 2025.
[6] Y . Lin, T. Wang, and S. Wang, “UA V-assisted emergency communi-
cations: An extended multi-armed bandit perspective,”IEEE Commun.
Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 938–941, 2019.
[7] K. Kuru, D. Ansell, W. Khan, and H. Yetgin, “Analysis and optimization
of unmanned aerial vehicle swarms in logistics: An intelligent delivery
platform,”IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 15804–15831, 2019.
[8] C. Zhang and J. M. Kovacs, “The application of small unmanned
aerial systems for precision agriculture: a review,”Precision Agriculture,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 693–712, 2012.
[9] M. Zhang and X. Li, “Drone-enabled internet-of-things relay for envi-
ronmental monitoring in remote areas without public networks,”IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7648–7662, 2020.
[10] Y . Zhu and S. Wang, “Efficient aerial data collection with cooperative
trajectory planning for large-scale wireless sensor networks,”IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 433–444, 2022.
[11] F. Liu, Y . Cui, C. Masouros, J. Xu, T. X. Han, Y . C. Eldar, and S. Buzzi,
“Integrated sensing and communications: Toward dual-functional wire-
less networks for 6G and beyond,”IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40,
no. 6, pp. 1728–1767, 2022.
[12] J. A. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Masouros, R. W. Heath, Z. Feng, L. Zheng, and
A. Petropulu, “An overview of signal processing techniques for joint
communication and radar sensing,”IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process.,
vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1295–1315, 2021.
[13] Z. Lyu, G. Zhu, and J. Xu, “Joint maneuver and beamforming design
for UA V-enabled integrated sensing and communication,”IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2424–2440, 2023.
[14] K. Meng, Q. Wu, S. Ma, W. Chen, K. Wang, and J. Li, “Throughput
maximization for UA V-enabled integrated periodic sensing and commu-
nication,”IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 671–687,
2023.
[15] Z. Wu, X. Li, Y . Cai, and W. Yuan, “Joint trajectory and resource
allocation design for RIS-assisted UA V-enabled ISAC systems,”IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1384–1388, 2024.
[16] S. Zhou, H. Yang, L. Xiang, and K. Yang, “Temporal-assisted beamform-
ing and trajectory prediction in sensing-enabled UA V communications,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 5408–5419, 2025.
[17] Y . Jiang, Q. Wu, W. Chen, and K. Meng, “UA V-enabled integrated
sensing and communication: Tracking design and optimization,”IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1024–1028, 2024.
[18] Y . Jiang, Q. Wu, H. Hui, W. Chen, and D. W. K. Ng, “Low-altitude uav
tracking via sensing-assisted predictive beamforming,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.12698, 2025.
[19] K. Meng, Q. Wu, W. Chen, and D. Li, “Sensing-assisted communica-
tion in vehicular networks with intelligent surface,”IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 876–893, 2024.
[20] C. Ji, Q. Liu, J. Liu, C. Yu, Y . Sun, R. Wang, and F. Liu, “Doppler-based
multistatic drone tracking via cellular downlink signals,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.25732, 2025.
[21] Y . Yang, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Q. Wu, Z. Wei, W. Chen, and W. Jia,
“Cooperative multi-static ISAC networks: A unified design framework
for active and passive sensing,”IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., pp. 1–
16, 2025.
[22] X. Lu, Z. Wei, R. Xu, L. Wang, B. Lu, and J. Piao, “Integrated
sensing and communication enabled multiple base stations cooperative
UA V detection,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC
Workshops), pp. 1882–1887, 2024.
[23] X. Cheng, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. Gao, S. Li, Z. Huang, L. Bai, Z. Yang,
X. Zheng, and L. Yang, “Intelligent multi-modal sensing-communication
integration: Synesthesia of machines,”IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 258–301, 2024.
[24] K. Tan and C. Zhu, “Multimodal sensing for intelligent V2X: A review
of recent advances toward deployment,”IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12,
no. 22, pp. 46294–46315, 2025.
[25] Q. Zhu, Y . Wang, W. Li, H. Huang, and G. Gui, “Advancing multi-modal
beam prediction with cross-modal feature enhancement and dynamic
fusion mechanism,”IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 7931–
7940, 2025.
[26] S. Tariq, B. E. Arfeto, U. Khalid, S. Kim, T. Q. Duong, and H. Shin,
“Deep quantum-transformer networks for multimodal beam prediction
in ISAC systems,”IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 18, pp. 29387–
29401, 2024.
[27] Y . Cui, J. Nie, X. Cao, T. Yu, J. Zou, J. Mu, and X. Jing, “Sensing-
assisted high reliable communication: A transformer-based beamforming
approach,”IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 782–795,
2024.
[28] L. Cheng, H. Zhang, B. Di, D. Niyato, and L. Song, “Large language
models empower multimodal integrated sensing and communication,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 190–197, 2025.
[29] Y . Xie, Y . Gong, Y . Zhao, M. Zhou, S. Wang, D. Zhang, Y . Wang,
and J. Wang, “Mpfusionnet: Transformer-based multi-modal perception
fusion for predictive beamforming in low-altitude UA V communication
networks,”IEEE Internet Things J., pp. 1–16, 2025.
[30] M. Alrabeiah and A. Alkhateeb, “Deep learning for TDD and FDD
massive MIMO: Mapping channels in space and frequency,” inProc.
Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., pp. 1465–1470, 2019.
[31] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” inProc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
(CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2016.
[32] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly,
J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale,” inProc. Int. Conf. Learn.
Representations (ICLR), 2021.
[33] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
with deep convolutional neural networks,” inProc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 25, 2012.
[34] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”Neural
Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[35] C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas, “PointNet: Deep learning on
point sets for 3D classification and segmentation,” inProc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), pp. 652–660, 2017.
[36] J. Deng, S. Shi, P. Li, W. Zhou, Y . Zhang, and H. Li, “V oxel r-cnn:
Towards high performance voxel-based 3d object detection,” inProc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, pp. 1201–1209, 2021.
[37] Y . Bengio, N. L ´eonard, and A. Courville, “Estimating or propagating
gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional computation,”arXiv
preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.
[38] W. Li, D. Wang, Z. Ding, A. Sohrabizadeh, Z. Qin, J. Cong, and Y . Sun,
“Hierarchical mixture of experts: Generalizable learning for high-level
synthesis,” inProc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, pp. 18476–18484,
2025.
[39] R. Zhang, Y . Luo, J. Liu, H. Yang, Z. Dong, D. Gudovskiy, T. Okuno,
Y . Nakata, K. Keutzer, Y . Du,et al., “Efficient deweahter mixture-of-
experts with uncertainty-aware feature-wise linear modulation,” inProc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 38, pp. 16812–16820, 2024.
[40] X. Cheng, Z. Huang, Y . Yu, L. Bai, M. Sun, Z. Han, R. Zhang, and S. Li,
“SynthSoM: A synthetic intelligent multi-modal sensing-communication
dataset for synesthesia of machines (som),”Scientific Data, vol. 12,
no. 1, p. 819, 2025.
[41] X. Cheng, Z. Huang, L. Bai, H. Zhang, M. Sun, B. Liu, S. Li,
J. Zhang, and M. Lee, “M3SC: A generic dataset for mixed multi-modal
(MMM) sensing and communication integration,”China Communica-
tions, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 13–29, 2023.
[42] M. Alrabeiah, A. Hredzak, and A. Alkhateeb, “Millimeter wave base
stations with cameras: Vision-aided beam and blockage prediction,” in
Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC), pp. 1–5, 2020.
[43] S. Jiang, G. Charan, and A. Alkhateeb, “Lidar aided future beam
prediction in real-world millimeter wave V2I communications,”IEEE
Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 212–216, 2023.