AUTOMATING THEREFINEMENT OFREINFORCEMENT
LEARNINGSPECIFICATIONS
Tanmay Ambadkar∗
The Pennsylvania State University
tsa5252@psu.edu
Ðor ¯de Žikeli´c†
Singapore Management University
dzikelic@smu.edu.sg
Abhinav Verma‡
The Pennsylvania State University
verma@psu.edu
ABSTRACT
Logical specifications have been shown to help reinforcement learning algorithms in
achieving complex tasks. However, when a task is under-specified, agents might fail
to learn useful policies. In this work, we explore the possibility of improving coarse-
grained logical specifications via an exploration-guided strategy. We propose
AUTOSPEC, a framework that searches for a logical specification refinement whose
satisfaction implies satisfaction of the original specification, but which provides
additional guidance therefore making it easier for reinforcement learning algorithms
to learn useful policies. AUTOSPECis applicable to reinforcement learning tasks
specified via the SpectRL specification logic. We exploit the compositional nature
of specifications written in SpectRL, and design four refinement procedures that
modify the abstract graph of the specification by either refining its existing edge
specifications or by introducing new edge specifications. We prove that all four
procedures maintain specification soundness, i.e. any trajectory satisfying the
refined specification also satisfies the original. We then show how AUTOSPECcan
be integrated with existing reinforcement learning algorithms for learning policies
from logical specifications. Our experiments demonstrate that AUTOSPECyields
promising improvements in terms of the complexity of control tasks that can be
solved, when refined logical specifications produced by AUTOSPECare utilized.
1 INTRODUCTION
Reinforcement Learning (RL) algorithms have made tremendous strides in recent years Sutton &
Barto (2018); Silver et al. (2016); Mnih et al. (2015); Levine et al. (2016). However, most algorithms
assume access to a scalar reward function that must be carefully engineered to make environments
amenable to RL—a practice known as reward engineering Ibrahim et al. (2024). This creates
challenges in applying RL to new environments where useful reward functions are hard to construct.
Furthermore, scalar Markovian rewards cannot provide sufficient feedback for certain tasks Abel et al.
(2021); Bowling et al. (2023), leading to growing interest in non-Markovian reward functions Li et al.
(2017a); Jothimurugan et al. (2021); Alur et al. (2023).
To make non-Markovian rewards tractable, it is standard to represent them via logical specifica-
tion formulas that capture the intended task. These approaches, known as specification-guided
reinforcement learning Aksaray et al. (2016); Li et al. (2017b); Icarte et al. (2018); Jothimurugan
et al. (2019; 2021), derive reward functions from logical specifications. However, this creates two
challenges: (i) providing specifications granular enough to guide RL algorithms, and (ii) defining
accurate labeling functions mapping environment states to specification predicates. Users often create
coarse specifications or labeling functions that, while logically correct, provide insufficient guidance
for learning.
∗Department of EECS, The Pennsylvania State University
†School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University
‡Department of EECS, The Pennsylvania State University
1
arXiv:2512.01047v1  [cs.AI]  30 Nov 2025
Figure 1: Example of refinement by AUTOSPECin a 9-rooms environment. The original MID-node
region includes a trap state from which recovery is impossible. The refined specification excludes
this trap, enabling the agent to learn a policy with higher satisfaction probability.
We present AUTOSPEC, a framework for automatically refining coarse specifications without user
intervention. We say that a logical specification iscoarse(orunder-specified) if its predicate labelings
or logical structure are too coarse to allow specification-guided RL algorithms to translate logical
specifications into reward functions that allow for effective learning of RL policies. AUTOSPEC
starts with an initial logical specification, translates it to a reward function, and attempts to learn a
policy. If the learned policy’s performance is unsatisfactory, AUTOSPECidentifies which specification
components cause learning failures and automatically refines both the specification formula and
labeling function. The refined specification’s satisfaction implies the original’s satisfaction while
providing additional structure for learning. This process repeats until a satisfactory policy is learned.
AUTOSPECworks with SpectRL specifications; boolean and sequential combinations of reach-avoid
tasks Jothimurugan et al. (2019). Any SpectRL specification decomposes into an abstract graph where
edges specify reach-avoid tasks Jothimurugan et al. (2021). AUTOSPECidentifies problematic edges
and applies targeted refinements: either modifying the labeling function for regions (Figure 1) or
restructuring the graph to add alternative paths. These problematic edges are identified by employing
anexploration-guided strategythat utilizes empirical trajectory data to identify edges in the abstract
graph whose reach-avoid tasks (i.e. initial, target or unsafe regions) make it hard to learn a good RL
policy. For instance, in Figure 1, the initial MID region of the MID-GOAL edge in the abstract graph
is under-specified, as it overlaps with a trap state. The trap state is not immediately obvious as there
is a path from MID to GOAL. By analyzing explored traces, AUTOSPECidentifies problematic start
states in MID and refines the region to exclude the trap (as shown in Figure 1), thereby refining the
logical reach-avoid specification associated to theMID-GOALedge.
We prove that all refinements maintain soundness, where satisfaction of the refined specification im-
plies satisfaction of the original. AUTOSPECintegrates with existing SpectRL-compatible algorithms
as demonstrated with DIRL Jothimurugan et al. (2021) and LSTS Shukla et al. (2024).
Our contributions:
1. A framework for automated refinement of logical RL specifications with four refinement
procedures, all with formal soundness guarantees (Section 3).
2. Integration with existing specification-guided RL algorithms, enabling them to solve tasks
with coarse specifications (Section 3).
3. Empirical demonstration that AUTOSPECenables learning from specifications that existing
methods cannot handle (Section 4).
Related work.Recent years have seen substantial progress in solving RL tasks specified via logical
specifications Aksaray et al. (2016); Li et al. (2017b); Icarte et al. (2018); Camacho et al. (2019);
Giacomo et al. (2019); Hasanbeig et al. (2022; 2019); Hahn et al. (2019); Jothimurugan et al. (2019;
2021); Xu & Topcu (2019). Many works consider different fragments of Linear Temporal Logic
(LTL) or their variants for specifying RL tasks. Icarte et al. (2018); Camacho et al. (2019) consider
tasks that can be specified using deterministic finite automata (DFA) and solve them byreward
machines, which decompose these tasks and translate them into a reward function. The reward
function can then be used to train existing RL algorithms. Li et al. (2017b) considers a variant of
LTL called TLTL for specifying tasks and propose a method for translating these specifications into
continuous reward functions. Hasanbeig et al. (2022; 2019); Hahn et al. (2019) study the translation
2
of tasks specified in LTL into reward functions. Alur et al. (2022) examines the theoretical questions
related to the translation of logical specifications into reward functions.
Jothimurugan et al. (2019) defines the specification language SpectRL, a finitary fragment of LTL and
provides justification for using this language to define specifications for RL tasks. A compositional
method that decomposes SpectRL specifications into an abstract graph and constructs a reward
function for each abstract graph edge was proposed in Jothimurugan et al. (2021). The approach by
Toro Icarte et al. (2019) focuses on discovering optimal reward structures through environmental
exploration and reward analysis. Compositional methods are further explored by Neary et al. (2022),
who propose removing unfulfillable subtasks, and Neary et al. (2023), who introduce verification
techniques to certify learned policies. Zikelic et al. (2023b) propose CLAPS, a compositional
method for learning neural network policies with formal guarantees on the satisfaction of SpectRL
specifications, thus advancing the applicability to safety-critical RL applications by utilizing prior
methods for learning reach-avoid policies with formal guarantees Lechner et al. (2022); Zikelic et al.
(2023a); Chatterjee et al. (2023).
Recent advancements also include LTL2Action Vaezipoor et al. (2021), which translates LTL specifi-
cations into sequences of tasks for RL agents. Other recent approaches, such as Qiu et al. (2023) and
DeepLTL Jackermeier & Abate (2025), leverage goal-conditioned RL and automata-based architec-
tures to solve complex LTL and ω-regular tasks zero-shot or in multi-task settings. Trainify Jin et al.
(2022) employs counterexample-guided abstraction and refinement (CEGAR) to iteratively improve
policies by addressing failure cases identified through counterexamples. However, these works
primarily focus on learning policies for fixed, well-defined specifications. In contrast, AUTOSPEC
studies the problem of automated logical specification refinement towards improving reward functions
obtained by translation from coarse logical RL specifications. Thus, our work is complementary to the
works on RL from logical specifications and can be integrated into off-the-shelf specification-guided
RL algorithms to improve the performance of learned agents.
2 PRELIMINARIES
MDPs.A Markov Decision Process (MDP) is a tuple M= (S, A, P, R, γ), where S⊆R n is the
state space, A⊆R m is the action space, P:S×A×S→[0,1] is the probabilistic transition
function, R is the (possibly non-Markovian) reward function, and γ is the discount factor. Let
η:S→[0,1] be the initial state distribution. A trajectory ζ in M is a sequence of states and actions
ζ=s 0, a0, s1, a1, . . .where si ∈S and ai ∈A . We use Z to denote the set of all trajectories in M
and Zf to denote the set of all finite trajectories in M, which are finite prefixes of trajectories ending
in states. A (pure) policy π:Z f →A assigns an action to each finite trajectory, and a non-Markovian
reward R:Z f →R assigns a reward to a finite trajectory. The MDPM under any policy π gives rise
to a probability space over the set of all trajectories in the MDP Puterman (1994). We use Pπ and Eπ
to denote the probability measure and the expectation operator in this probability space, respectively.
Logical specifications for Reinforcement Learning.In this work, we are solving RL tasks defined
by logical specifications. Formally, alogical specification(or, simply, aspecification) is a boolean
function ϕ:Z → {true,false} which specifies whether a trajectory in the MDP satisfies the
specification. We write ζ|=ϕ whenever a trajectory ζ satisfies the specification ϕ. The objective
of a specification-guided RL task is to find a policy π∗ that maximizes the probability of satisfying
the given specification ϕ, i.e. π∗ ∈argmax πPπ[ζ|=ϕ] . Specification-guided RL algorithms use
the specification to create a dense reward that guides the policy search, and therefore outperform
algorithms that cannot leverage the specification for learning and instead require manual reward
engineering Jothimurugan et al. (2021); Shukla et al. (2024).
SpectRL specification logic.We consider RL tasks specified in the SpectRL specification logic.
SpectRL Jothimurugan et al. (2019) is a fragment of Linear Temporal Logic (LTL) which consists of
all boolean and sequential combinations of reach-avoid tasks. Formally, a specification in SpectRL
is defined in terms ofpredicatesandspecification formulas. An atomic predicate is a function
a:S→ {true,false} which defines a set of states that satisfy the atomic predicate. A predicate is
a boolean combination of atomic predicates, i.e. b:=a|b 1 ∧b 2 |b 1 ∨b 2, where a is an atomic
predicate and b1 and b2 are predicates. Specification formulas in SpectRL are defined by the grammar
ϕ:=achieveb|ϕ 1 ensuringb|ϕ 1;ϕ 2 |ϕ 1 orϕ 2 (1)
3
where b is a predicate and ϕ1 and ϕ2 are specification formulas. Intuitively, ”achieveb ” requires the
agent to reach a state in which the predicate b is satisfied. The clause ”ϕ1 ensuringb ” requires the
agent to satisfy the specification ϕ while only visiting states in which the predicate b is satisfied. The
clause ”ϕ1;ϕ 2” requires the agent to first satisfy specification ϕ1 and then satisfy specification ϕ2.
The clause ”ϕ1 orϕ 2” requires satisfaction of at least one of ϕ1 or ϕ2. See Jothimurugan et al. (2019)
for the formal definition of the semantics of each clause.
Abstract graphs for SpectRL specifications.It was shown in Jothimurugan et al. (2021) that each
specification written in the SpectRL specification logic can be translated into an equivalent abstract
graph. Anabstract graphis a directed acyclic graph (DAG) whose vertices represent sets of MDP
states and whose edges are annotated with sets of safe MDP states. Hence, each abstract graph edge
defines areach-avoid specification, where the task is to reach the set of states defined by the target
vertex of the edge starting from the set of states defined by the source vertex of the edge, while
staying within the set of safe states defined by the edge.
Definition 1(Abstract graph).Anabstract graph G= (V, E, β, s, t)is a DAG, whereV is a finite set
of vertices, E is a finite set of edges, β:V∪E→ B(S) is a labeling function that maps each vertex
and each edge to a subset of the MDP states S, s∈V is the source vertex and t∈V is the target
vertex. Furthermore, we require that β(s) =support(η) is the support of the initial state distribution
ηof the MDP .
Given a trajectory ζ in the MDP and an abstract graph G= (V, E, β, s, t), we say that ζ satisfies
abstract reachabilityfor G (written ζ|=G ) if it gives rise to a path in G that traverses G from s to t
and satisfies the reach-avoid specifications of every traversed edge. It was shown in Jothimurugan
et al. (2021) that, given any SpectRL specification ϕ, one can construct an abstract graph G such that
ζ|=ϕif and only ifζ|=Gholds for each trajectoryζin the MDP. Hence, solving an RL task for a
SpectRL specification reduces to solving an abstract reachability task in the abstract graphG.
Problem statement.Given an MDP M and a SpectRL specification ϕ, our goal is to learn a policy π
such that the probability Pπ[ζ|=ϕ] of a trajectory induced by the policy satisfying the specification
is maximized.
Specification refinement.In order to solve this problem, we will utilize a common approach in
specification-guided RL, to first translate the logical specification ϕ to a (non-sparse) reward function
and then learn a policy by using existing RL algorithms with this reward function. However, if the
probability of the specification being satisfied under the learned policy is unsatisfactory (i.e. below
some desired probability threshold p∈[0,1] ), we will then refine the logical specification ϕ into
a new SpectRL specification ϕr. We will then repeat the above process until the probability of the
specification being satisfied under the learned policy becomes satisfactory.
Definition 2(Specification refinement).Given two logical specifications ϕ and ϕr, we say that
ϕr refines ϕ, if any MDP trajectory that satisfies the refined specification ϕr also satisfies the
specificationϕ. That is, if for an MDP trajectoryζwe have(ζ|=ϕ r) =⇒(ζ|=ϕ).
3 AUTOMATEDREFINEMENT OFRL SPECIFICATIONS
We now present AUTOSPEC, a framework for automated refinement of logical specifications in
RL tasks. The key insight is that specification failures often stem from identifiable issues that can
be systematically addressed: overly broad target regions, insufficient safety constraints, missing
waypoints, or lack of alternative paths. When a specification-guided RL algorithm A fails to learn a
satisfactory policy for specification ϕ, AUTOSPECidentifies which components caused the failure
and applies targeted refinements to improve learnability while maintaining soundness.
AUTOSPECoperates as a wrapper around any SpectRL-compatible algorithm. It monitors the learning
process, and when a policy π fails to satisfy the specification with probability at least p∈[0,1]
(a user-provided threshold), it computes a refined specification ϕr such that: (1) satisfaction of ϕr
implies satisfaction of ϕ (soundness), and (2) ϕr provides additional structure that makes it easier
to learn. This refined specification is returned to algorithm A to continue learning. Through this
iterative refinement process, AUTOSPECenables solving RL tasks with coarse specifications that
would otherwise be unlearnable.
4
Overview of AUTOSPEC.Algorithm 1 shows the complete AUTOSPECframework. The algorithm
takes as input an MDP M, a SpectRL specification ϕ, a satisfaction threshold p, and any specification-
guided RL algorithm A. It first translates ϕ into an abstract graph G and uses A to learn policies for
the graph edges. For each edge e where A learned a policy but that policy fails to achieve satisfaction
probability p, AUTOSPECapplies four refinement procedures in sequence: SeqRefine, AddRefine,
PastRefine, and OrRefine. This ordering reflects increasing levels of structural modification; from
local predicate adjustments to graph topology changes. The first refinement that successfully improves
performance above threshold p is applied, the graph is updated, and policies are relearned before
proceeding to the next edge.
Algorithm 1AUTOSPEC
Require:MDPM, specificationϕ, thresholdp∈[0,1], spec-guided RL algorithmA
G←abstract graph corresponding toϕ
Π← A(G)[set of policies for edges inGlearned by algorithmA]
fore=u→u ′ an edge inGdo
πe ∈Π←policy learned for edgee(Null ifAdoes not learn a policy for edgee)
ifπ e is not Null andP(π e)< pthen
ζ←sampled trajectories of the system
ifLEARNPOLICY(e,SEQREFINE(e,G,ζ))> pthen
G←SEQREFINE(e,G,ζ)
else ifLEARNPOLICY(e,ADDREFINE(e,G,ζ))> pthen
G←ADDREFINE(e,G,ζ)
else ifLEARNPOLICY(e,PASTREFINE(e,G,ζ))> pthen
G←PASTREFINE(e,G,ζ)
else ifLEARNPOLICY(e,ORREFINE(e,G,ζ))> pthen
G←ORREFINE(e,G,ζ)
end if
Π← A(G)[set of policies for updated abstract graphG]
end if
end for
ReturnGandΠ
AUTOSPECiterates through all edges e=u→u ′ of the abstract graph G for which the specification-
guided RL algorithm A has learned a policy but for which the reach-avoid task satisfaction probability
is below the provided probability threshold p. For each such edge, AUTOSPECperforms four
refinement procedures that focus on different possible reasons for the edge e=u→u ′ being
challenging for learning a satisfactory policy.
SeqRefine, which is invoked first, tries to locally refine the problematic edgee=u→u ′ by using
predicate refinement techniques to refine the labeling function at the target region associated to the
vertex u′ and the safety region associated to the edge e. If SeqRefine fails to improve performance
above threshold, AUTOSPECinvokes AddRefine which attempts to add a waypoint (i.e. a new abstract
graph vertex) between the vertices u and u′, making path-finding easier. If AddRefine also fails,
AUTOSPECinvokes PastRefine which tries to refine the source node u. Finally, if other refinement
procedures fail, AUTOSPECinvokes OrRefine which aims to find alternative paths tou ′.
After each attempted refinement, an off-the-shelf RL algorithm (LEARNPOLICYin Algorithm 1)
is used to estimate the satisfaction probability of the refined edge. When a refinement succeeds in
achieving satisfaction probability above p, the refined abstract graph G is updated and AUTOSPEC
applies the specification-guided RL algorithm A to learn a new set of edge policies Π for the entire
graph. At the end, the final abstract graphGcorresponds to the refined specificationϕ r of the input
specificationϕ.
3.1 SPECIFICATIONREFINEMENTSUBPROCEDURES
We now define the four specification refinement subprocedures used by AUTOSPECin Algorithm 1.
Each procedure addresses a specific type of specification inadequacy, and they are applied in order of
increasing structural modification to the abstract graph. The detailed pseudocodes are provided in the
Appendix. Once a problematic edge e=u→u ′ is identified (an edge with satisfaction probability
5
(a) ReachRefine
 (b) AddRefine
 (c) PastRefine
 (d) OrRefine
Figure 2: Illustrations of abstract graph refinement processes. (a) ReachRefine demonstrating removal
of failed part of goal region and addition of unsafe states set to existing avoid. (b) AddRefine
demonstrating addition of waypoint between 2 nodes. (c) PastRefine removes part of the source
node from where the agent failed (red) to get to the target, and keeps successful start states (green).
(d) OrRefine shows how alternative paths (dotted lines) to target are constructed using existing
specification nodes.
below threshold p), AUTOSPECsamples trajectories ζ using the learned policy, where the number of
trajectories is an algorithm hyperparameter.
SeqRefine: Refining Predicates.The first refinement subprocedure addresses overly coarse pred-
icates in the reach and avoid conditions. For edge e=u→u ′, SeqRefine refines both the target
predicateb=β(u ′)and the safety predicatec=β(e)by calling two subprocedures:
ReachRefinecollects all states along sampled trajectories that successfully reached the goal region b.
The refined goal region is computed as br =b∩ConvexHull(reached states) , effectively excluding
unreachable portions of the original target region.
AvoidRefinecollects states where trajectories entered unsafe regions (complement of c). The refined
safe region is computed as cr =c\ConvexHull(lastkunsafe states) , where k is a hyperparameter
controlling how much of the trajectory tail to consider. This removes demonstrated unsafe areas from
the safety region. We cannot relax or reduce the avoid regions during refinement because it would
break soundness. In the relaxation, a policy can enter states that were part of the avoid in the original
specification. Thus, the refined specification in that case is not a subset of the original specification.
SeqRefine returns a refined graph Gr identical to G except with updated labeling: βr(u′) =b r
and βr(e) =c r. This refinement provides more precise guidance by excluding problematic regions
discovered through exploration.
AddRefine: Introducing Waypoints.The second refinement addresses long or complex paths by
decomposing them. When direct navigation from u to u′ proves difficult, AddRefine introduces an
intermediate vertex u′′ by collecting midpoint states from successful trajectories that reached β(u′),
defining β(u′′) =β(e)∩ConvexHull(midpoints) , and replacing edge e=u→u ′ with two edges:
e′′ =u→u ′′ and e′ =u ′′ →u ′. This decomposition breaks a challenging long-horizon task into
two shorter subtasks that are easier to learn.
PastRefine: Partitioning Source Regions.The third refinement addresses heterogeneous starting
conditions where some initial states in u consistently lead to success while others lead to failure.
PastRefine separates trajectories into successful and failing sets based on whether they satisfied
edge e, then learns a hyperplane separating successful from failing initial states. It creates region br
containing successful starting states and introduces new vertex u∗ with β(u∗) =b r having the same
incoming edges as u. The refinement replaces problematic edge e=u→u ′ with e∗ =u ∗ →u ′.
As shown in Figure 2(a), this refinement identifies and isolates promising initial conditions while
preserving the original vertexuand its connections.
OrRefine: Exploiting Alternative Paths.The fourth refinement addresses blocked or infeasible
direct paths by leveraging the existing graph structure. When the path through edge e=u→u ′
cannot be made satisfactory, OrRefine identifies alternative parents ofu′ (vertices ui with existing
edges ui →u ′), and for each viable ui, adds new edge eui =u→u i with β(eui) =β(e) . It then
tests if the alternative path u→u i →u ′ achieves the threshold. As illustrated in Figure 2(b), this
creates alternative routes to the target using only existing vertices, maintaining all original safety
constraints. OrRefine can iteratively explore ancestors ofu i if the direct connection fails.
6
As shown in Algorithm 1, any specification-guided RL algorithm that is applicable to SpectRL
specifications and that learns policies for edges in the abstract graph can be integrated into the
AUTOSPECframework. The specification-guided RL algorithm learns policies for edges in the
abstract graph, until it is unable to proceed beyond an edge with a sufficient satisfaction probability.
We then perform the refinements in AUTOSPEC, using sampling to estimate the satisfaction probability
of each refinement until one is found to exceed the threshold. This refinement is used to create an
updated abstract graph and an updated set of edge policies are learned with respect to this graph.
3.2 CORRECTNESS OFAUTOSPEC
The following theorem establishes correctness of AUTOSPEC, showing that the specification ϕr
computed by AUTOSPECis indeed a refinement of the input specification ϕ. The proof, provided
in Appendix A.2, proceeds by proving that each of the four refinement procedures results in a
specification refinement.
Theorem 1(Correctness of AUTOSPEC).Given an abstract graph G of a SpectRL specification ϕ
and an edge e,AUTOSPECcomputes a specification ϕr and returns an abstract graph Gr and an
edge er such that ϕr refines ϕ. That is, for any MDP trajectory ζ, we have (ζ|=ϕ r) =⇒(ζ|=ϕ) .
Incompleteness of the Specification Refinement Problem.AUTOSPECprovidessoundnessguar-
antees – as shown in Theorem 1, the produced specification isguaranteedto be a refinement of the
original specification as in Definition 2, and every trajectory that satisfies the refined satisfaction
must also satisfy the original specification. However, AUTOSPECdoes not provide completeness
guarantees. This is not a limitation of AUTOSPEC, but an inherent property of the specification
refinement problem itself because the problem isundecidable. This is because, even for the simplest
case of reachability specifications (e.g., “reach region G with probability at least p”), deciding
whether a given policy satisfies a specification isundecidablefor general continuous-state MDPs or
probabilistic programs capable of encoding Turing-complete behavior Kaminski & Katoen (2015).
Consequently, no specification refinement algorithm can be both sound and complete. AUTOSPEC
therefore focuses on soundness, which is important towards ensuring that a policy for the refined task
also solves the task defined by the original specification.
4 EXPERIMENTALEVALUATION
We evaluate AUTOSPECon its ability to diagnose and repair specification failures that prevent
existing algorithms from learning satisfactory policies. Our experiments address three questions: (1)
Can AUTOSPECcorrectly identify which refinement type is needed for different failure modes? (2)
Do the refinements enable learning from previously unlearnable specifications? (3) What are the
requirements and limitations of the refinement process?
4.1 EXPERIMENTALSETUP
We integrate AUTOSPECwith two specification-guided RL algorithms: DIRL Jothimurugan et al.
(2021), which uses Dijkstra-style graph search with systematic exploration, and LSTS Shukla
et al. (2024), which uses multi-armed bandits for edge selection with epsilon-greedy exploration.
These algorithms differ fundamentally in their exploration strategies, allowing us to examine how
AUTOSPEC’s effectiveness depends on the underlying learning algorithm.
We evaluate on two domains specifically chosen to stress-test different aspects of specification
refinement:
n-Rooms:Grid-based navigation with walls and doors, providing controlled tests of specific failure
modes. State space: (x, y, θ, d)∈R4 (position, angle to goal, distance). Action space: (v, θ)∈R2
(velocity, direction). The n-rooms domain has been extensively used in specification-guided RL
research Jothimurugan et al. (2021; 2019); Zikelic et al. (2023b) as it provides clear geometric
structure while still presenting challenging long-horizon tasks. Its modular room structure naturally
creates the types of specification failures we aim to address: trap states at room boundaries, dangerous
narrow passages between rooms, and multiple alternative paths through different door configurations.
7
PandaGym Gallouédec et al. (2021):Robotic manipulation requiring 3D navigation around obsta-
cles. This domain tests refinement in high-dimensional continuous control where geometric intuitions
may not apply directly. Following recent work showing the challenges of specification-guided RL
in manipulation tasks Shukla et al. (2024), we use this domain to validate that our convex hull and
hyperplane-based refinements remain effective in high-dimensional spaces where human intuition
about specification failures is limited.
For learning edge policies, both algorithms use PPO Schulman et al. (2017) with stable-baselines3 Raf-
fin et al. (2021) implementation, following the standard practice in recent specification-guided RL
work Jothimurugan et al. (2021); Zikelic et al. (2023b). We use 2-layer networks (64 neurons each),
learning rate 0.0003, and standard PPO hyperparameters. In all experiments we evaluate refinements
using a deliberately high satisfaction threshold (p= 0.99 ). The purpose of this choice is method-
ological: by selecting a probability level that is difficult to achieve under coarse or under-specified
predicates, we can clearly observe how the cumulative probability of satisfying the specification
improves as AutoSpec performs successive refinements. Using such a stringent threshold ensures
that even small improvements in guidance become visible in the satisfaction curves and allows us to
measure the full extent of the benefit provided by refinement, independent of how poorly the initial
specification performs.
All experiments are repeated over five random seeds. Plots report the mean across the five runs,
with error bars showing the empirical mean ± variance. Specifically, each data point in the learning
curves represents the performance of a policy trained for the distinct number of timesteps indicated
on the x-axis (e.g., policies are trained for 80,000, 100,000, and 120,000 steps independently across
5 seeds). To estimate the specification satisfaction probability (y-axis), the trained policy for each
edge is evaluated over 1000 rollout trajectories to empirically count successful versus failed attempts.
The final success probabilities displayed in the plots are calculated using the product of success
probability of the best path from start to goal.
4.2 ALGORITHM-DEPENDENTEFFECTIVENESS: DIRLVSLSTS
Figure 3: 100-rooms Environment with marked regions its DAG specification
Our experiments reveal that AUTOSPEC’s effectiveness depends critically on the base algorithm’s
exploration strategy. We demonstrate this through a 100-rooms environment (Figure 3) with the
complex specification:ϕ=ϕ start; (ϕm1 orϕ m2);ϕ m3; (ϕm4 orϕ m5);ϕ goal
(a) Mid-goal DIRL performance
 (b) Full-spec DIRL performance
 (c) Mid-goal LSTS performance
Figure 4: Task satisfiability curves representing performances of DIRL and LSTS for sub-
specifications and complete specification
8
This specification structure, with multiple disjunctive branches and sequential compositions, rep-
resents the type of complex task decomposition that prior work Jothimurugan et al. (2019; 2021)
has identified as necessary for real-world applications but challenging for existing algorithms. The
100-rooms scale specifically tests whether refinements remain effective when the state space is large
enough that exhaustive exploration is infeasible, reflecting concerns raised in Shukla et al. (2024)
about scalability of compositional methods.
With DiRL (Successful Refinement).As shown in Figure 4(a-b), DiRL’s systematic exploration
enables successful refinement. The algorithm explores edges in order of estimated difficulty, providing
sufficient trajectory data for each edge before moving to the next. AUTOSPECsuccessfully applies
ReachRefine on the ϕm1 edge to remove unreachable portions of the target region, PastRefine on
the ϕm3 edge to identify successful starting regions, and OrRefine when direct paths fail to find
alternative routes through ϕm2. The satisfaction probability improves from near 0% to approximately
60% through these refinements.
With LSTS (Refinement Failure).Figure 4(c) shows LSTS failing on the same specification. The
bandit-based exploration spreads effort across all edges simultaneously, preventing deep exploration
of any single edge. Consequently, edges to M4, M5, and Goal achieve 0% satisfaction, providing
no successful trajectories for refinement computation. AUTOSPECcorrectly reports its inability to
refine without samples, demonstrating that refinement quality fundamentally depends on the base
algorithm’s exploration strategy.
Evaluation on Randomized 100-rooms and predicate placementTo evaluate the generalization
capabilities of our framework, we deployed AUTOSPECin a procedurally generated 4-Way Grid-
world where wall connectivity, and predicate placement were fully randomized for each seed (see
Appendix A.3.1 for generation details). This setup specifically tests the system’s ability to synthesize
policies without reliance on hand-engineered specifications or environment-specific heuristics. As
shown in Figure 6, AUTOSPECsignificantly outperforms the DIRL baseline, achieving a terminal
success probability of approximately 60% compared to the baseline’s stagnation at 20%. These
results confirm that AUTOSPECautonomously identifies and resolves task bottlenecks, raising the
success rate of critical transitions from <20% to >90% via automatic refinement. (Appendix
A.3.5))
4.3 EVALUATION OFINDIVIDUALREFINEMENTS
We design targeted experiments isolating specific failure modes to validate each refinement procedure.
SeqRefine: Trap State Elimination (Figure 7). Setup:9-rooms environment where the goal
region includes a blocked room creating a trap state.Failure mode:Agent reaches the trap portion
of the goal and cannot escape.Refinement:ReachRefine identifies that successful trajectories
only reach the accessible portion of the goal. The refined specification excludes the trap region:
br =b∩ConvexHull(reached states) .Result:Satisfaction probability improves from 15% to 85%,
demonstrating AUTOSPEC’s ability to learn environmental constraints not captured in the original
specification.
SeqRefine: Safety Constraint Discovery (Figure 8). Setup:9-rooms with a narrow dangerous
passage below the goal.Failure mode:Shortest path goes through narrow passage where agent
frequently fails.Refinement:AvoidRefine identifies failure states near the narrow passage. The
refined specification expands the avoid region: cr =c\ConvexHull(last 10 failure states) .Result:
Agent learns to use wider but longer safe path, improving satisfaction from 30% to 75%.
AddRefine: Waypoint Introduction (Figure 9). Setup:Long-horizon navigation across multiple
rooms.Failure mode:Direct path too complex for single policy to learn reliably.Refinement:
AddRefine identifies midpoints of successful trajectories and introduces intermediate vertex u′′.
Result:Decomposes task into two manageable subtasks, improving satisfaction from 20% to 90%.
PastRefine: Initial State Partitioning (Figure 10). Setup:Starting region includes states from
which goal is unreachable.Failure mode:Policy cannot succeed from certain initial states.Re-
finement:PastRefine learns hyperplane separating successful from failing starts.Result:Focuses
learning on viable initial states, improving satisfaction from 40% to 80%.
OrRefine: Alternative Path Discovery (Figure 11). Setup:Specification with multiple possible
paths: ϕMID1 ;ϕ GOAL or ϕMID2 ;ϕ GOAL.Failure mode:Direct path through MID1 blocked.
9
Refinement:OrRefine adds edge ϕMID1 →ϕ MID2 , creating alternative route.Result:Enables
satisfaction through alternate path when direct path has 0% success.
4.4 HIGH-DIMENSIONALVALIDATION: PANDAGYM
Figure 5: Evaluation of AUTOSPECon PandaGym: (a) Two perspectives of the environment (1st and
2nd Figures), where the red region is an intermediate goal and an invisible wall blocks direct paths.
(b) Performance of DiRL with and without AUTOSPEC: ReachRefine on first edge (3rd Figure) and
PastRefine on second edge (4th Figure).
To validate beyond grid environments, we test AUTOSPECon PandaGym’s continuous
3D manipulation task. The specification requires navigating around an invisible wall:
(reachred-region avoid wall); (reachgreen-region avoid wall) . The invisible wall creates a chal-
lenging scenario where the agent cannot directly observe the obstacle, making specification refinement
crucial.
As shown in Figure 5, AUTOSPECwith DiRL successfully applies ReachRefine on the first edge to
identify and exclude unreachable portions of the red region behind the wall, focusing the policy on
achievable subgoals. On the second edge, PastRefine learns that only certain approach angles from
the red region lead to successful reaching of the green region, effectively partitioning the intermediate
state space based on trajectory outcomes. This demonstrates that AUTOSPEC’s geometric refinements
(convex hulls for ReachRefine, hyperplanes for PastRefine) remain effective in high-dimensional
spaces where human intuition about the specification failures would be difficult. The success in this
domain is particularly noteworthy because the refinements must capture 3D spatial relationships
without explicit knowledge of the obstacle geometry.
Computational Overhead.AUTOSPECavoids full retraining by only updating the policies associated
with the identified subset of refined edges R. The total computational cost is formalized as Ttotal =
Tbase +P
e∈R Te. Since |R| is typically small relative to the initial graph size, the aggregate overhead
is bounded (empirically Ttotal ≤2T base). In the 100-room experiments, the baseline required ∼240 s
to evaluate the 8 fixed edges, while AUTOSPECaveraged 390±42 s. This overhead corresponds
directly to the training of 4–7 additional refinement edges per seed, with the observed variance
(σ≈42s ) driven by the differing topological complexity of the randomized environments. This
computational investment is highly efficient, scaling linearly with the number of detected bottlenecks
rather than the global state space size. Given the substantial improvement in success probability
(from ≈20% to ≈60% ), this bounded overhead represents a favorable trade-off for achieving robust
autonomy in stochastic domains.
5 CONCLUSION
We presented AUTOSPEC, a framework for automated refinement of coarse-grained logical specifica-
tions in reinforcement learning. AUTOSPECaddresses two common specification issues — coarse
formulas and coarse labeling functions through four refinement procedures that maintain formal
soundness. Our experiments on n-rooms and PandaGym environments demonstrate that AUTOSPEC
can improve specification satisfiability when integrated with existing algorithms like DiRL and LSTS.
Our evaluation also reveals fundamental limitations: AUTOSPECrequires sufficient exploration
data from the base algorithm to compute meaningful refinements. When algorithms fail to generate
successful trajectories (as LSTS did on complex specifications), refinement becomes impossible.
Despite these limitations, AUTOSPECrepresents the first systematic approach to automatically
refining logical specifications based on learning failures. Future work should address reducing
10
exploration requirements for refinement and extending beyond SpectRL to more expressive temporal
logics, such as infinite-horizon ω-regular specifications. While AUTOSPECcurrently relies on finite
witnesses, it could be adapted to these settings by decomposing tasks into a finite prefix (amenable to
our current DAG-based refinement) and a cyclic suffix (which would require extending our witness
analysis to handle infinite behaviors). The design of good specifications remains challenging in
practice, and automated refinement is an important step toward making specification-guided RL more
practical.
REFERENCES
David Abel, Will Dabney, Anna Harutyunyan, Mark K. Ho, Michael L. Littman, Doina Precup,
and Satinder Singh. On the expressivity of Markov reward. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2021.
Derya Aksaray, Austin Jones, Zhaodan Kong, Mac Schwager, and Calin Belta. Q-learning for robust
satisfaction of signal temporal logic specifications. In55th IEEE Conference on Decision and
Control, CDC 2016, Las Vegas, NV , USA, December 12-14, 2016, pp. 6565–6570. IEEE, 2016. doi:
10.1109/CDC.2016.7799279. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/CDC.2016.7799279.
Rajeev Alur, Suguman Bansal, Osbert Bastani, and Kishor Jothimurugan. A framework for trans-
forming specifications in reinforcement learning. pp. 604–624, 2022.
Rajeev Alur, Suguman Bansal, Osbert Bastani, and Kishor Jothimurugan. Specification-guided
reinforcement learning. 2023.
Michael Bowling, John D Martin, David Abel, and Will Dabney. Settling the reward hypothesis,
2023.
Alberto Camacho, Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A.
McIlraith. LTL and beyond: Formal languages for reward function specification in reinforcement
learning. In Sarit Kraus (ed.),Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019, pp. 6065–6073. ijcai.org,
2019. doi: 10.24963/IJCAI.2019/840. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/
840.
Krishnendu Chatterjee, Thomas A. Henzinger, Mathias Lechner, and Dorde Zikelic. A learner-
verifier framework for neural network controllers and certificates of stochastic systems. In Sriram
Sankaranarayanan and Natasha Sharygina (eds.),Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and
Analysis of Systems - 29th International Conference, TACAS 2023, Held as Part of the European
Joint Conferences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2022, Paris, France, April 22-
27, 2023, Proceedings, Part I, volume 13993 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 3–25.
Springer, 2023. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-30823-9\_1. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-30823-9_1.
Quentin Gallouédec, Nicolas Cazin, Emmanuel Dellandréa, and Liming Chen. panda-gym: Open-
Source Goal-Conditioned Environments for Robotic Learning.4th Robot Learning Workshop:
Self-Supervised and Lifelong Learning at NeurIPS, 2021.
Giuseppe De Giacomo, Luca Iocchi, Marco Favorito, and Fabio Patrizi. Foundations for restraining
bolts: Reinforcement learning with ltlf/ldlf restraining specifications. In J. Benton, Nir Lipovetzky,
Eva Onaindia, David E. Smith, and Siddharth Srivastava (eds.),Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth
International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS 2019, Berkeley, CA,
USA, July 11-15, 2019, pp. 128–136. AAAI Press, 2019. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/
index.php/ICAPS/article/view/3549.
Ernst Moritz Hahn, Mateo Perez, Sven Schewe, Fabio Somenzi, Ashutosh Trivedi, and Dominik
Wojtczak. Omega-regular objectives in model-free reinforcement learning. In Tomás V ojnar
and Lijun Zhang (eds.),Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems
- 25th International Conference, TACAS 2019, Held as Part of the European Joint Confer-
ences on Theory and Practice of Software, ETAPS 2019, Prague, Czech Republic, April 6-11,
2019, Proceedings, Part I, volume 11427 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 395–412.
11
Springer, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-17462-0\_27. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-17462-0_27.
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Yiannis Kantaros, Alessandro Abate, Daniel Kroening, George J.
Pappas, and Insup Lee. Reinforcement learning for temporal logic control synthesis with proba-
bilistic satisfaction guarantees. In58th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, CDC 2019,
Nice, France, December 11-13, 2019, pp. 5338–5343. IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/CDC40024.2019.
9028919. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/CDC40024.2019.9028919.
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Daniel Kroening, and Alessandro Abate. LCRL: certified policy
synthesis via logically-constrained reinforcement learning. In Erika Ábrahám and Marco Paolieri
(eds.),Quantitative Evaluation of Systems - 19th International Conference, QEST 2022, Warsaw,
Poland, September 12-16, 2022, Proceedings, volume 13479 ofLecture Notes in Computer
Science, pp. 217–231. Springer, 2022. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-16336-4\_11. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-16336-4_11.
Sinan Ibrahim, Mostafa Mostafa, Ali Jnadi, Hadi Salloum, and Pavel Osinenko. Comprehensive
overview of reward engineering and shaping in advancing reinforcement learning applications,
2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10215.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Using
reward machines for high-level task specification and decomposition in reinforcement learning.
In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.),Proceedings of the 35th International Conference
on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018,
volume 80 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2112–2121. PMLR, 2018. URL
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/icarte18a.html.
Mathias Jackermeier and Alessandro Abate. DeepLTL: Learning to efficiently satisfy complex
LTL specifications for multi-task RL. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2025. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=9pW2J49flQ.
Peng Jin, Jiaxu Tian, Dapeng Zhi, Xuejun Wen, and Min Zhang. Trainify: A cegar-driven training
and verification framework for safe deep reinforcement learning. In Sharon Shoham and Yakir Vizel
(eds.),Computer Aided Verification, pp. 193–218, Cham, 2022. Springer International Publishing.
ISBN 978-3-031-13185-1.
Kishor Jothimurugan, Rajeev Alur, and Osbert Bastani. A composable specification language for
reinforcement learning tasks.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Kishor Jothimurugan, Suguman Bansal, Osbert Bastani, and Rajeev Alur. Compositional rein-
forcement learning from logical specifications. In A. Beygelzimer, Y . Dauphin, P. Liang, and
J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=ion6Lo5tKtJ.
Benjamin Lucien Kaminski and Joost-Pieter Katoen. On the hardness of almost–sure termination.
InInternational Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science, pp. 307–318.
Springer, 2015.
Mathias Lechner, Dorde Zikelic, Krishnendu Chatterjee, and Thomas A. Henzinger. Stability
verification in stochastic control systems via neural network supermartingales. InThirty-Sixth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2022, Thirty-Fourth Conference on Innova-
tive Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2022, The Twelveth Symposium on Educa-
tional Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2022 Virtual Event, February 22 - March 1,
2022, pp. 7326–7336. AAAI Press, 2022. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V36I7.20695. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i7.20695.
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
visuomotor policies.J. Mach. Learn. Res., 17:39:1–39:40, 2016. URL http://jmlr.org/
papers/v17/15-522.html.
Xiao Li, Cristian-Ioan Vasile, and Calin Belta. Reinforcement learning with temporal logic rewards. In
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3834–3839.
IEEE, 2017a.
12
Xiao Li, Cristian Ioan Vasile, and Calin Belta. Reinforcement learning with temporal logic rewards. In
2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS 2017, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, September 24-28, 2017, pp. 3834–3839. IEEE, 2017b. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2017.
8206234. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2017.8206234.
V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G.
Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Pe-
tersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran,
Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep rein-
forcement learning.Nat., 518(7540):529–533, 2015. doi: 10.1038/NATURE14236. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236.
Cyrus Neary, Christos Verginis, Murat Cubuktepe, and Ufuk Topcu. Verifiable and compositional
reinforcement learning systems. InProceedings of the International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling, volume 32, pp. 615–623, 2022.
Cyrus Neary, Aryaman Singh Samyal, Christos Verginis, Murat Cubuktepe, and Ufuk Topcu. Ver-
ifiable reinforcement learning systems via compositionality.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06420,
2023.
Martin L. Puterman.Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming.
Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. Wiley, 1994. ISBN 978-0-47161977-2. doi: 10.1002/
9780470316887. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1002/9780470316887.
Wenjie Qiu, Wensen Mao, and He Zhu. Instructing goal-conditioned reinforcement learning agents
with temporal logic objectives. InThirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=19AgWnmyoV.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations.Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
20-1364.html.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms.CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1707.06347.
Yash Shukla, Tanushree Burman, Abhishek Kulkarni, Robert Wright, Alvaro Velasquez, and Jivko
Sinapov. Logical specifications-guided dynamic task sampling for reinforcement learning agents.
In34th International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, 2024. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=okLobjqfjx.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the
game of go with deep neural networks and tree search.Nat., 529(7587):484–489, 2016. doi:
10.1038/NATURE16961. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1038/nature16961.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto.Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Klassen, Rick Valenzano, Margarita Castro, and
Sheila McIlraith. Learning reward machines for partially observable reinforcement learn-
ing. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
nett (eds.),Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
2019/file/532435c44bec236b471a47a88d63513d-Paper.pdf.
Pashootan Vaezipoor, Andrew C Li, Rodrigo A Toro Icarte, and Sheila A Mcilraith. Ltl2action:
Generalizing ltl instructions for multi-task rl. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 10497–10508. PMLR, 2021.
13
Zhe Xu and Ufuk Topcu. Transfer of temporal logic formulas in reinforcement learning. In
Sarit Kraus (ed.),Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, IJCAI 2019, Macao, China, August 10-16, 2019, pp. 4010–4018. ijcai.org, 2019. doi:
10.24963/IJCAI.2019/557. URLhttps://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/557.
Dorde Zikelic, Mathias Lechner, Thomas A. Henzinger, and Krishnendu Chatterjee. Learning control
policies for stochastic systems with reach-avoid guarantees. In Brian Williams, Yiling Chen, and
Jennifer Neville (eds.),Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023,
Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth
Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Washington, DC, USA,
February 7-14, 2023, pp. 11926–11935. AAAI Press, 2023a. doi: 10.1609/AAAI.V37I10.26407.
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i10.26407.
Dorde Zikelic, Mathias Lechner, Abhinav Verma, Krishnendu Chatterjee, and Thomas A. Hen-
zinger. Compositional policy learning in stochastic control systems with formal guarantees. In
Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine
(eds.),Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 -
16, 2023, 2023b. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
95827e011b9e899f189a01fe2f4ef316-Abstract-Conference.html.
14
A APPENDIX/SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
A.1 REFINEMENTALGORITHMS
Here we present pseudo-code for the individual refinement algorithms described in Section 3.1
Algorithm 2ReachRefine
Require:b:=β(u ′), ζ
Sr ← {s|s∈b∩ζ}Collect all the goal region states from the trajectories
br ←b∩ConvexHull(S r)Create the convex hull of the collected states
returnb r
Algorithm 3AvoidRefine
Require:c:=β(e), ζ
Or ← {}Initialize new avoid region with an empty set
forζ i inζdo
ifζ i[−1]̸∈cthen
Or ←O r ∪ {sj |s j ∈ζ i
V(len(ζi)−j)≤k}
Append the lastkstates from every trajectory that ended up in the avoid region
end if
end for
cr ←c\ConvexHull(O r) Create a convex hull around the collected states and remove it form the
original safe region
returnc r
Algorithm 4SeqRefine: Refining Edgee=u→u ′
Require:Edgee=u→u ′, GraphG, set of trajectoriesζ.
b=β(u ′)States in the reach predicate
c=β(e)States in the avoid predicate
br ←ReachRefine(b, ζ)
cr ←AvoidRefine(c, ζ)
ur ←[β(u r) =b r]Redefine target node with new predicate
er ←[u→u r,withβ(e r) =c r]Redefine edge with new predicate
G′ ←G\[e←e r]Replace edge with refinement
returnG ′
Algorithm 5AddRefine
Require:Edgee=u→u ′, GraphG, set of trajectoriesζ.
Sr ← {}
forζ i inζdo
ifζ i |=e[i.e. trajectory was successful]then
Sr ←S r ∪ζ i[len(ζi)//2]Add center of trajectory as waypoint
end if
end for
br ←ConvexHull(S r)∩β(e)
u′′ ←[β(u ′′) =b r]Define target node for waypoint
e′′ ←[u→u ′′,withβ(e ′′) :=β(e)]
e′ ←[u ′′ →u ′,withβ(e ′) :=β(e)]Define edges with new waypoint predicate
G′ ←G\[e←[e ′′;e ′]]Replace edgeewith composition of new edges
returnG ′
15
Algorithm 6PastRefine: Refining Abstract Graph Exploration
Require:Edgee=u→u ′, GraphG, set of trajectoriesζ.
S← {}Sr ← {}
forζ i inζdo
S←S∪ζ i[0]Collect start states from all trajectories
ifζ i |=ethen
Sr ←S r ∪ζ i[0]Collect start states from successful trajectories
end if
end for
Identify a hyperplaneHseparating theS r andS\S r
br ← {s∈S:H(s)≥0}
u∗ ←[β(u ∗) =b r]Redefine initial node with new predicate
er ←[u ∗ →u,withβ(e r) :=β(e)]Redefine edge with new predicate
G′ ←G\[e←e r]Replace edge with refinement
returnG ′
Algorithm 7OrRefine: Disjunctive Specification Refinement
Require:Edgee=u→u ′, GraphG, set of trajectoriesζ.
E={e i ∈G|e i =u i →u ′}Collect all ’parents’ ofu ′
fore i ∈Edo
eui ←[u→u i,withβ(e r) :=β(e)]Define edges from source to parents
G←G∪[e ui]Add new edge to graph
end for
returnG
A.2 PROOF OFTHEOREM1
Theorem 1(Correctness of AUTOSPEC)Given an abstract graph G of a SpectRL specification ϕ and
an edge e,AUTOSPECcomputes a specification ϕr with abstract graph Gr such that ϕr refines ϕ.
That is, for any MDP trajectoryζ, we have(ζ|=ϕ r) =⇒(ζ|=ϕ).
Proof.To prove the theorem, it suffices to show that for each of the four refinement subprocedures, if
they return an abstract graph Gr, then the corresponding specification ϕr is a refinement of the input
specificationϕ.
By the definition of abstract reachability, we have (ζ|=ϕ)⇔(ζ|=G) and (ζ|=ϕ r)⇔(ζ|=G r).
Hence, to prove that (ζ|=ϕ r)⇒(ζ|=ϕ) which is the definition of specification refinement as in
Definition 2, it suffices to prove that (ζ|=G r)⇒(ζ|=G) . We prove this claim for each refinement
subprocedure.
SeqRefine.Suppose that Gr =SEQREFINE(e, G, ζ). Let e=u→u ′. By our design of SeqRefine,
the abstract graph Gr has the same vertex set, edge set and labeling function as G, with the only
difference being that βr(u′)⊆β(u ′) due to ReachRefine and βr(e)⊆β(e) due to AvoidRefine.
Hence, every trajectory ζ that satisfies all reach-avoid tasks in Gr must also satisfy those in G, giving
us(ζ|=G r)⇒(ζ|=G).
AddRefine.Suppose that Gr =ADDREFINE(e, G, ζ). Let e=u→u ′. AddRefine introduces
a new vertex u′′ and replaces edge e with two sequentially composed edges e′′ =u→u ′′ and
e′ =u ′′ →u ′ where βr(e′′) =β r(e′) =β(e) . Any trajectory satisfying the refined path through
u′′ must visit the intermediate waypoint while respecting the original safety constraints, thus also
satisfying the original edge specification. Therefore,(ζ|=G r)⇒(ζ|=G).
PastRefine.PastRefine refines the region associated to vertex u by restricting it to βr(u)⊆β(u) .
This refinement affects both edge e=u→u ′ and all edges incoming to u. Since the refined region
is a subset of the original, any trajectory satisfying the refined specification must originate from states
that were valid in the original specification. Hence,(ζ|=G r)⇒(ζ|=G).
16
OrRefine.Suppose that Gr =ORREFINE(e, G, ζ). OrRefine only adds edges between existing
vertices in G. Specifically, for a problematic edge e=u→u ′, it identifies existing edges ei =u i →
u′ and adds new edgese new =u→u i whereβ(e new) =β(e).
Consider a trajectory ζ that satisfies Gr via a newly added path u→u i →u ′. Since: (1) Both ui
and u′ existed in the original vertex set of G, (2) The edge ui →u ′ existed in the original edge set of
G, (3) The new edge u→u i maintains the safety constraints of the original edge (β(enew) =β(e) ),
the trajectory ζ reaches u′ through a combination of transitions that respect all original safety
constraints and only uses vertices from the original specification. The path through ui represents a
valid alternative route in the original specification structure. Therefore,(ζ|=G r)⇒(ζ|=G).
Thus, all four refinement procedures preserve specification soundness.
A.3 EXPERIMENTS
A.3.1 PROCEDURALENVIRONMENTGENERATION
To evaluate the robustness of the proposed refinement framework, we utilize a procedurally generated
Continuous Gridworld environment (Figure 6. The environment layout and region locations are
randomized for each experimental seed to ensure that the agent learns generalized navigation skills
rather than memorizing a specific map layout. We use the same topological layout as in Figure 3.
The generation process follows a three-step strategy:
A.3.2 GRID ANDREGIONDEFINITIONS
The domain is defined as a grid of 10×10 rooms, where each room has a spatial dimension of
8.0×8.0 units. We define a set of logical regions R={Start, Goal, M1, M2, MG, MG1, MG2}.
Each regionr∈ Ris physically instantiated as a2×2block of contiguous rooms.
A.3.3 RANDOMIZEDPLACEMENTSTRATEGY
The placement of regions is performed stochastically to maximize variability while maintaining a
solvable structure:
1. Start and Goal Initialization:We define the four corners of the grid as candidate zones. To
ensure traversal complexity, the Start and Goal regions are restricted toopposite corners.
A pair of opposite corner zones (e.g., Top-Left and Bottom-Right) is selected uniformly at
random. TheStartregion is assigned to one zone and theGoalto the other, denoted as:
(P osstart, P osgoal)∼Uniform({(C TL , CBR),(C TR , CBL)})(2)
whereCrepresents the set of valid indices for a2×2block in a specific corner.
2. Intermediate Region Placement:The remaining intermediate regions (e.g., M1, M2, . . .)
are placed randomly within the grid. Their locations are sampled uniformly from the set of
all valid 2×2 block coordinates, subject to the constraint that no two regions may spatially
overlap:
P osr ∼Uniform(G valid \
[
r′∈Rplaced
Area(r′))(3)
This ensures that all sub-goals are distinct and distributed stochastically across the map.
A.3.4 STOCHASTICCONNECTIVITY
Once regions are placed, the connectivity between adjacent rooms is generated probabilistically. For
every pair of adjacent rooms (u, v)in the grid, a connecting door is instantiated via a Bernoulli trial:
P(Door u,v) = 0.5(4)
17
(a) Randomized Environment and Predi-
cates Instance
 (b) Success Probability Comparison
Figure 6:Experimental Results on the 100-room Gridworld.(a) A visualization of one of the
procedurally generated environment instance, showing the randomized placement of the Start (green),
Goal (red), and intermediate refinement regions (blue). (b) Comparative performance analysis
showing the mean success probability of the proposed AutoSpec method versus the DIRL baseline
over 80k and 100k timesteps.
A.3.5 RESULTS FORRANDOMIZEDPREDICATELOCATION
The experimental results on the randomized 100-room Gridworld demonstrate that AUTOSPECoper-
ates effectively without the need for carefully crafted specifications or hand-engineered environments.
As illustrated in Figure 6, the environment introduces significant complexity through randomized wall
configurations and arbitrarily placed predicate regions. We evaluated performance across 5 different
procedurally generated environments (one per seed) and report the aggregated results in Figure 6b (b).
Under these stochastic conditions, the DIRL baseline fails to synthesize a robust policy, stagnating at
a low success probability.
In contrast, AUTOSPECdemonstrates superior adaptability by automatically refining the specification
graph to overcome structural anomalies. While the global end-to-end success rate plateaus at
approximately 50%, this limitation is not a failure of the refinement process itself, but rather the result
of specific topological challenges inherent to the randomized domain. Our analysis of the transition
logs reveals two specific phenomena that dictate performance:
The "Bridge" Bottleneck.In 80% of the random seeds, the primary failure mode is the transition
exiting the central convergence point ( MG→MG 1). While agents can reliably reach the MG
region (>90% success), the unrefined transition to the subsequent Mid1 region frequently collapses
to a success probability of 10–15% due to randomized wall placements creating narrow or non-linear
passages. AUTOSPECaddresses this by applyingAddRefineto introduce intermediate waypoints
(MG→MG add →MG 1) orReachRefineto tighten target constraints. Empirical logs show these
refinements consistently raise the local success rate of this specific bottleneck edge to 50–70%,
thereby recovering end-to-end traversability where standard methods fail.
Autonomous Corridor Switching.A critical advantage of the refinement process is the ability
to dynamically switch logical corridors. The global task allows for alternate paths ( Start→
{M1, M2} →MG→ {MG1, MG2} →Goal). In instances where the path through MG1 remains
stochastically blocked (success <5% ) even after refinement attempts, AUTOSPECeffectively prunes
this branch. The search strategy then shifts probability mass to the alternative MG2 branch. In
our experiments, we observed seeds where the unrefined agent effectively "gave up" due to the
difficulty of MG1, whereas the refined agent successfully discovered and optimized the alternative
MG→MG 2 route (>78% local success), proving that automated refinement acts as a form of
robust structural exploration.
18
Figure 7: Evaluation of Reach Probabilities in the 9-Rooms Environment. (a) The layout of the
9-rooms environment, showing the walls, doors, and goal regions, and the estimated convex hull for
the new reach region, showing how the refinement process effectively restructs the reachable states,
leading to better satisfaction of the specification (b) A comparison of reach probabilities between
DIRL Jothimurugan et al. (2021) and the proposed AutoSpec approach. The x-axis denotes the
number of steps, and the y-axis denotes the estimated probability of success.
Figure 8: Results of Avoid refinement. (a) The layout of the 9-rooms environment, showing the
walls, doors, goal regions and avoid regions (red) and learned trajectories before (green) and after
(blue) refinement, with new estimated avoid regions (black) (b) A comparison of reach probabilities
between DiRL and the proposed Avoid Refinement.
A.3.6 RESULTS FORINDIVIDUALREFINEMENTS
We conducted multiple experiments to validate our approach to refining coarse-grained SpectRL
specifications for solving RL tasks. The goal of our experiments is to compare the performance of the
original DIRL Jothimurugan et al. (2021) algorithm and our integration of DIRL with AUTOSPEC,
thus showcasing the ability of AUTOSPECto refine SpectRL specifications that are challenging for the
existing algorithms for RL from logical specifications. For learning edge policies, in both cases we
use Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) Schulman et al. (2017), implemented using stable-baselines3
Raffin et al. (2021). We employ a 2-layer neural network, each layer containing 64 neurons. We
consider two environments.
9 Rooms.The 9 Rooms environment consists of walls blocking access to some rooms and doors
allowing access to adjacent rooms. It has a 4-D continuous state space (x, y, θ, d)∈R4, representing
the 2D position, angle to the goal, and distance to the goal. We consider several SpectRL specifications
which are translated into abstract graphs. The start position is sampled from the region associated to
the source vertex, and the goal position is sampled from the region associated to the target vertex
of the abstract graph. The 2-D continuous action space determines the velocity and direction of the
agent(v, θ)∈R 2, with the new position calculated ass ′ =s+ (vcos(θ), vsin(θ)).
PandaGym.The Pandagym Gallouédec et al. (2021) reach environment has a robotic arm with an
object picked up and the task is to place the object at the correct location. A wall blocking the path to
19
the goal is invisible to the robot. The state space consists of the current position of the gripper arm in
3D and the goal position.
Experiment 1: Atomic predicate refinement.To illustrate how an incorrect specification is
identified and corrected using Algorithm 2, we consider a 9 Rooms environment in Figure 7. In this
environment, one room in the goal region is blocked, representing the incorrect specification. Figure
7 displays the learning curves for both the original and refined specifications, demonstrating the
performance improvements achieved through the refinement process. Algorithm 3 can be empirically
verified by creating a 9 Rooms environment as shown in Figure 8, where Figure 8 (a) shows the goal
region along with avoid region (red). To improve probability of satisfaction the agent should avoid
the narrow door below the goal and use the longer but safer route to approach the goal from the side.
We see the learned trajectories before and after refinement in Figure 8 (a), where the new avoid region
blocks the narrow door, effectively causing the agent to learn a policy that uses the wider door on the
side. This helped improve specification satisfiability.
Experiment 2: Sequential refinement.We created a specification ϕgoal to evaluate Algorithm 5.
Figure 9 show that AddRefine is extremely sample efficient, and can construct a new specification to
aid the current edge with an extremely high success probability. We also show the distribution of
states that make up the new specification ϕr
goal. To verify Algorithm 6, we designed a specification
ϕmid;ϕ goal, as depicted in Figure 10. The learning curves, also shown in Figure 10, indicate
that the proposed refinement significantly enhances the reach probability compared to the original
specification. Additionally, Figure 10 illustrates the distribution of states in the MID region from
which the GOAL region can be reached, which informs the refinement process. Figure 5 shows
how sequential refinement can be applied on higher dimensional state spaces. Different refinements
produce varying results, as shown in Figure 5.
Figure 9: Results of AddRefine in the 9-Rooms Environment. (a) The environment is annotated with
start and goal regions (b) Learning curves comparing reach probabilities for DiRL and AutoSpec.
Figure 10: Results of Sequential Specification Refinement in the 9-Rooms Environment. (a) The
environment annotated with the distribution of states in the MID region from which the GOAL region
can be reached. (b) Learning curves comparing reach probabilities for DiRL and AutoSpec.
20
Figure 11: Disjunctive Specification Refinement in 9-Rooms. (a) The environment with regions
relevant to the specification ϕ:=ϕ MID1 ;ϕ GOAL orϕ MID2 ;ϕ GOAL. (b) Learning curves showing
that incorporating an additional specification ϕMID1 ;ϕ MID2 is essential to achieve the desired
success probability.
Experiment 3: Disjunctive refinement.To validate Algorithm 7, we constructed a 9 Rooms
environment with a specification featuring two distinct paths to the goal. Figure 11 illustrates the
environment and the regions relevant to the specificationϕ:=ϕ MID1 ;ϕ GOAL orϕ MID2 ;ϕ GOAL.
The learning curves forOrRefine, shown in Figure 11, demonstrate that incorporating an additional
specification ϕMID1 ;ϕ MID2 is essential to achieve good success probability. In contrast, Algorithm
4 and Algorithm 6 fail to perform adequately due to the subspecification having zero reach probability,
preventing effective local refinement. This validation underscores the necessity ofOrRefinein
scenarios where sequential modifications alone are insufficient.
All Experiments have been performed using i7-8750H with 32GB RAM and no GPU. Trajectories
were collected after training the policy forntimesteps and 5 different seeds.
Hyperparameters for learning algorithms:
1. Learning Rate: 0.0003
2. n steps: 2048
3. Batch size: 64
4. Epochs: 10
5.γ: 0.99
A.4 LIMITATIONS
AutoSpec requires finite witnesses to specification satisfaction and hence can only work on finite
trajectories. This means that we must consider only finitary fragments of LTL, like SpectRL. While
Autospec is sound, i.e if a refinement is found satisfactory, trajectories for the refinement will also
satisfy the original specification (Theorem 3.1), it is not complete, i.e. it might fail to find a candidate
refinement even if such a refinement exists, especially if the specification satisfiability is extremely
low. It is also not guaranteed that the candidate refinement is an ’optimal’ refinement, in terms of the
tightest bounds possible on the refined predicates.
A.5 SOCIETALIMPACTS
We wish to improve the performance of Reinforcement Learning algorithms and attempt to improve
under-specified human specifications, which have an impact on various applications that aim to
deploy RL agents with multi-objective tasks. The applications extend to robotics, path-finding tasks
and any tasks that involve manual specifications which could be incorrect. This may have both
positive or negative societal impacts depending on the use case of such RL deployments, positive
impacts include applications to manufacturing, healthcare, and in-home robotic assistants; while
negative impacts would be most consequential in military or surveillance infrastructure. These issues
are shared across most work on reinforcement learning algorithms.
21